                         STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA
                       DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                    MOLLY M. SPEARMAN
                             STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION



    South Carolina Social Studies College- and
            Career-Ready Standards
                Pursuant to South Carolina Accountability Act of 1998



 The South Carolina Department of Education does not discriminate on the basis of race, color,
  religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, veteran status, or disability in admission to,
        treatment in, or employment in its programs and activities. Inquiries regarding the
 nondiscrimination policies should be made to the Employee Relations Manager, 1429 Senate
Street, Columbia, South Carolina 29201, 803-734-8781. For further information on federal non-
discrimination regulations, including Title IX, contact the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights at
                             OCR.DC@ed.gov or call 1-800-421-3481
Contents
Overview                                                             1
Legislative Requirements                                             5
Kindergarten                                                         8
The Community Around Us                                              8
  Kindergarten Standards                                             9
Grade 1                                                             12
Life in South Carolina                                              12
  Grade 1 Standards                                                 13
Grade 2                                                             17
Life in the United States                                           17
  Grade 2 Standards                                                 18
Grade 3                                                             22
World Geography                                                     22
  Grade 3 Deconstructed Skills                                      23
  Grade 3 Standards                                                 24
Grade 4                                                             28
United States & South Carolina Studies Part I                       28
  Grade 4 Deconstructed Skills                                      30
  Grade 4 Standards                                                 32
Grade 5                                                             38
United States & South Carolina Studies Part II                      38
  Grade 5 Deconstructed Skills                                      40
  Grade 5 Standards                                                 42
Grade 6                                                             49
World Civilizations                                                 49
  Grade 6 Deconstructed Skills                                      51
  Grade 6 Standards                                                 53
Grade 7                                                             60
Geography of World Regions                                          60
  Grade 7 Deconstructed Skills                                      62
  Grade 7 Standards                                                 64
Grade 8                                                             73
South Carolina and the United States                                73
  Grade 8 Deconstructed Skills                                      75
South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards    i
  Grade 8 Standards                                                         77
Human Geography                                                             84
  Human Geography Deconstructed Skills                                      86
  Human Geography Standards                                                 88
Modern World History                                                        96
  Modern World History Deconstructed Skills                                 98
  Modern World History Standards                                           100
United States History and the Constitution                                 107
  United States History and the Constitution Deconstructed Skills          109
  United States History and the Constitution Standards                     111
United States Government                                                   119
  United States Government Deconstructed Skills                            121
  United States Government Standards                                       122
Economics and Personal Finance                                             127
  Economics and Personal Finance Deconstructed Skills                      128
  Economics and Personal Finance Standards                                 129
Teaching the History and Literature of the Old and New Testament Era       134
  Teaching the History and Literature of the Old Testament Era Standards   135
  Teaching the History and Literature of the New Testament Era Standards   137
References                                                                 139
Appendix A Primary (K–2) Skills Progression                                143
Appendix B Historical Thinking Skills                                      147
Appendix C Geography Skills Progression                                    150
Appendix D Glossary                                                        151
Appendix E                                                                 160




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards            ii
Overview

Purpose
In accordance with the South Carolina Educational Accountability Act of 1998 (S.C. Code Ann.
§ 59- 18-110), the purpose of academic standards is to provide the basis for the development of
local curricula and statewide assessment. Consensually developed academic standards describe
for each grade and high school core area the specific areas of student learning that are considered
the most important for proficiency in the discipline at the particular level.

The social studies standards development process was designed to develop clear, rigorous, and
coherent standards that will prepare students for success in their intended career paths, either
directly to the workforce or furthering their education in post-secondary institutions. In addition,
the social studies standards were created to prepare students for success as engaged citizens.

The standards in this document are not sequenced for instruction and do not prescribe classroom
activities, materials, instructional strategies, approaches, or practices. The South Carolina Social
Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards is not a curriculum.

Process
The South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards were collaboratively
written by a team of South Carolina classroom teachers, instructional coaches, district leaders,
representatives of professional organizations, community members, parents, higher education
faculty, and educators who specialize in English language learners, special education, career and
technology education, and assessment who were selected through an application and rubric
process by the South Carolina Department of Education. The South Carolina Department of
Education’s social studies standards writing team began the development process by reviewing a
variety of resources and conceptualizing what students who graduate from South Carolina’s
public education system should demonstrate and understand. The Profile of the South Carolina
Graduate was the compass that guided the revision.

The draft of South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards were posted
online via the South Carolina Department of Education’s website for public review on December
5, 2017. Feedback gleaned from public review was used to guide the revision process.

Academic standards
Academic standards are statements of the most important, consensually determined expectations
for student learning in a particular discipline. In South Carolina, standards are provided for each
grade from kindergarten through grade eight, high school required courses, and selected
electives.

Disciplinary Thinking Skills
Nikki Mandell and Bobbie Malone (2008) explained that “history is a discipline of inquiry and
analysis” (p. 3). The discipline of history is “a way of thinking that encourages students to
analyze historical evidence, evaluate it, and then demonstrate their understanding of that
evidence. Teaching and learning history requires repeated practice with those essential elements
of the discipline” (p. 1). Discipline-specific skills are necessary across the social studies for the


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 1
student’s understanding of the content to be taught at each grade level. The study of history,
economics, geography, and civics and government each require unique, discipline-specific
practices.

The identification of disciplinary skills for the social studies was critical to the development of
these standards. The South Carolina Educational Accountability Act of 1998 (S.C. Code Ann. §
59-18-110) requires:

       The standards must be reflective of the highest level of academic skills with the rigor
       necessary to improve the curriculum and instruction in South Carolina's schools so that
       students are encouraged to learn at unprecedented levels and must be reflective of the
       highest level of academic skills at each grade level.

Because of this, the discipline-specific skills begin at the kindergarten level and progress to
graduation with developmentally appropriate iterations of the same skill being further honed at
each grade level. To be college- and career-ready, students should both understand skills and
know how to apply those skills.

Twenty-first century thinking requires practice with levels of complexity in order to perfect.
Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (1997) is used as a guideline for determining the cognitive
demands and complexity of the social studies indicators.

Enduring Understanding
As described by Grant Wiggins and Jay McTighe (2005) in Understanding by Design, “enduring
understandings are central to a discipline and are transferable to new situations” and represent
“the specific inferences based on big ideas that have lasting value beyond the classroom” (pg.
342).

To further explain enduring understandings in social studies, Wiggins and McTighe (2005)
offered:

       For example, in learning about the rule of law, students come to understand that written
       laws specify the limits of a government’s power and articulate the rights of individuals,
       such as due process. This inference from facts, based on big ideas such as rights and due
       process, provides a conceptual unifying lens through which to recognize the significance
       of the Magna Carta as well as to examine emerging democracies in the developing world.

       Because such understandings are generally abstract in nature and often not obvious, they
       require uncoverage through sustained inquiry rather than one-shot coverage. The student
       must come to understand or be helped to grasp the idea, as a result of work. If teachers
       treat an understanding like a fact, the student is unlikely to get it (p. 342).




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 2
Glossary
Important yet less well-known terms appear throughout the standards and the indicators and are
defined in the glossary. This glossary is found in Appendix D and is intended for teachers. It is
not designed for student assessment purposes.

Indicators
Indicators are the specific statements integrating the content, skill, and theme that the students
must demonstrate in order for them to meet the particular academic standard. Indicators provide
essential guidance for ongoing inquiry and assessment.

Although the use of verbs from Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001) will
assist teachers in identifying the cognitive processes of the indicator, the emphasis is on the
thinking expressed by Webb’s Depth of Knowledge (Webb, 1997). Discipline-specific skills,
which are aligned to Depth of Knowledge levels, are embedded in each indicator. For example, if
the indicator for a history course requires a student to examine causes of an event, then the
indicator is in the Analysis Domain under Bloom’s Revised Taxonomy and at Level 2 of Webb’s
Depth of Knowledge. In contrast, if the indicator for a history course requires a student to
examine continuities and changes within a period of time, then the indicator is in the Analysis
Domain under Bloom’s Taxonomy and at Level 4 of Webb’s Depth of Knowledge. While
Bloom’s domain remained consistent with the verb examine, the shift in the discipline-specific
skill – causation to continuity and change – moved the Depth of Knowledge to the highest level.
Beginning in grade four, each standard contains six indicators, based on disciplinary skills,
which promote higher order thinking aligned to Depth of Knowledge. This design is to
encourage inquiry and meaningful learning needed for college, career, and civic readiness.

Themes
Linda Levstik and Keith Barton (2015) observed that “timelines, names, and memorized ‘facts’
are not history, and they are certainly not compelling. The enduring themes and questions that
humans have struggled with over time are…compelling” (p. 3). Thematic instruction allows for
information to be categorized into organized concepts. These concepts are at the core of social
studies thinking and allow for content connections to be made in a variety of ways. Analysis of
overlapping themes allow students to move away from rote memorization of historical events
and toward becoming 21st century learners who can use thematic content for new learning,
problem solving, and genuine inquiry. Thematic instruction allows for students to make
connections between content within a course and between various courses to deepen their
understanding. Social Studies involves the development of civic dispositions and working with
instructional themes to allow students to not only learn social studies content, but to apply
flexible thinking to the content and be able to address societal issues in a responsible manner.

K–12 instruction centers on the themes of history, economics, geography, and civics and
government. While the standards in the primary grades are these actual four themes, subsequent
courses are built on sub-themes of the original four.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 3
South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 4
Legislative Requirements

The following information provides an overview of the legislative requirements pertaining to
social studies education in South Carolina.

The county board of education and the board of trustees for each school district shall see that in
every school under their care there shall be taught, as far as practicable, orthography, reading,
writing, arithmetic, geography, English grammar and instruction in phonics, the elements of
agriculture, the history of the United States and of this State, the principles of the Constitutions
of the United States and of this State, morals and good behavior, algebra, physiology and
hygiene (especially as to the effects of alcoholic liquors and narcotics upon the human system),
English literature, and such other branches as the state board may from time to time direct (S.C.
Code Ann. § 59- 29-10).

The State Board of Education shall examine the current status of the teaching of South Carolina
history. By the 1989–90 school year, each public school of the State must instruct students in the
history of the black people as a regular part of its history and social studies courses. The State
Board of Education shall establish regulations for the adoption of history and social studies
textbooks which incorporate black history and shall, through the South Carolina Department of
Education, assist the school districts in developing and locating suitable printed materials and
other aids for instruction in black history. The State Board of Education shall examine curricular
material for grades 1-6 to determine the level of emphasis on the relationship of agriculture and
other industries to the South Carolina economy (S.C. Code Ann. § 59- 29-55).

Study of United States Constitution requisite for graduation; attendance at veteran's activities.
   (A) All high schools, colleges, and universities in this State that are sustained or in any
       manner supported by public funds shall give instruction in the essentials of the United
       States Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, and the Federalist Papers, including
       the study of and devotion to American institutions and ideals, and no student in any such
       school, college, or university may receive a certificate of graduation without previously
       passing a satisfactory examination upon the provisions and principles of the United States
       Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, and the Federalist Papers, and, if a citizen
       of the United States, satisfying the examining power of his loyalty thereto.

   (B) On November eleventh of each year, which is a legal holiday in this State as provided by
       Section 53-5-10 to commemorate and honor veterans, all elementary, middle, and high
       schools in this State if they are open, shall devote at least one hour of the school day in
       either classroom instruction or at a student body assembly program to study the United
       States Constitution and the Declaration of Independence. If any such school is not open
       on November eleventh, this instruction or assembly program must be given on the day
       the school is open immediately preceding November eleventh.

   (C) On November eleventh of each year, schools may permit students to attend activities to
       commemorate and honor veterans that are held at locations within their respective
       counties. The parent of a student seeking to be excused pursuant to this subsection shall



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 5
       provide prior written consent to the appropriate school personnel (S.C. Code Ann. § 59-
       29-120).

The instruction provided for in S.C. Code Ann. § 59- 29-120 shall be given for at least one year
of the high school, college and university grades, respectively (S.C. Code Ann. § 59- 29-130).

Founding principles instruction required; reporting requirements; professional development (S.C.
Code Ann. § 59- 29-155). This act is known and may be cited as the 'South Carolina Founding
Principles Act'.

   (A) The State Board of Education and Education Oversight Committee shall incorporate
       instruction on the founding principles that shaped the United States into the required
       study of the United States Constitution as provided in Section 59-29-120, and the South
       Carolina Social Studies Standards upon the next cyclical review. The board and
       committee shall include, at a minimum, the Federalist Papers and instruction on the
       structure of government and the role of the separation of powers and the freedoms
       guaranteed by the Bill of Rights to the United States Constitution.

   (B) The State Department of Education biennially shall submit a report by October fifteenth
       of each odd numbered year, commencing in 2017, to the Senate Education Committee
       and the House Education and Public Works Committee documenting the implementation
       of this section.

   (C) The State Department of Education shall make available professional development
       opportunities to teachers regarding subsection (A) by physical or electronic means.

The State Board of Education shall establish a committee, which includes, but is not limited to,
personnel from the South Carolina Department of Education, school districts, and institutions of
higher education. The purpose of the committee shall be to assist the State Board of Education in
the identification of the dimensions of thinking which shall constitute "higher order thinking and
problem solving” (S.C. Code Ann. § 59- 29-179).

The South Carolina Department of Education and all school districts shall emphasize higher
order problem solving skills in curricula at all levels. The South Carolina Department of
Education shall assist the school districts by locating, developing, and advising the districts on
the development of materials and other aids which may be used to teach higher order problem
solving skills within existing subjects (S.C. Code Ann. § 59- 29-180).




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 6
South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 7
Kindergarten

The Community Around Us

Students in the primary grades (kindergarten–second grade) are building the foundation of social
studies skills and themes that will follow them through grade 12 to prepare them for college and
career. Despite there being a different overall focus for each subsequent grade level, students in
primary grades will be exposed to the following themes of social studies in their courses: history,
geography, economics, and civics and government. As students develop cognitively, these
themes become more focused based on the grade-level content and disciplinary thinking skills.

Kindergarten students will begin their social studies experience by examining ways they are part
of a classroom community and all of the social studies concepts involved in that community. By
comparing themselves with classmates, mapping their classroom, and exploring classroom wants
and needs with their teacher, kindergarten students will start to use skills of a social studies
thinker. Instruction should utilize the specific thinking skills of a historian, geographer,
economist, and political scientist developed for kindergartens. The progression of
developmentally appropriate thinking skills begins in kindergarten and builds with each year of
social studies instruction. The disciplinary skills, themes, and content knowledge work together
to support the goals of the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate.

The primary grade-level social studies standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-
specific themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to
teach thematically, and to support project or problem based learning. To encourage inquiry, the
kindergarten The Community Around Us standards are constructed around the following four
themes:

History – History in the primary grades encourages the use of evidence to study comparison,
continuity, and changes while scaffolding content from community to nation.
Geography – Geography in the primary grades encourages the study of Earth as a home for
humans and how they interact with it.
Economics – Economics in the primary grades encourages the study of wants and needs,
scarcity, and supply and demand as a basis for understanding how economic decisions affect
students’ lives.
Civics and Government – Civics and Government in the primary grades encourages the study
of a citizen’s role and responsibility, including the study of rules, authority, and consequences
within their communities.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 8
                                Kindergarten Standards

Key Concept
                                                     Standards

              Standard 1: Utilize the college and career skills of a historian to study continuity
              and change over time for one’s personal history and one’s community.
              Enduring Understanding: The development of historical thinking skills begins in
              kindergarten by comparing individuals and examining the ways in which they
              change and/or remain the same over time.
              The student will:
              K.H.1         Identify similarities and differences between oneself and others.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into students’
                             individual characteristics in relation to those of their classmates.

  History     K.H.2          Examine ways in which individuals change or stay the same over
                             time.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the ways that
                             people change or stay the same over various periods of time,
                             including days, weeks, and the school year.

              K.H.3          Identify different forms of evidence used in historical inquiry, such as
                             digital sources, maps, photographs/images, or texts.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into what one can
                             learn about the world by identifying and utilizing primary sources.

          Standard 2: Utilize the college and career skills of a geographer to apply map skills
          and draw conclusions about place in one’s personal community.
          Enduring Understanding: Map literacy skills are essential to the synthesizing of
          cultural and natural information which allows for geographic questioning within the
          social studies standards.
          The student will:
          K.G.1          Identify a map, various map features, and explain the purpose of
Geography                maps.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the purpose of
                             maps and begin to recognize how the parts of maps are used to gain
                             information (e.g., map title, map key/legend). This indicator was also
                             developed to encourage the use of positional words used to describe
                             locations on maps.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 9
Key Concept
                                                     Standards

              K.G.2          Utilize sources of geographic information (e.g., digital sources, maps,
                             or photographs/images) to define and identify cultural and/or natural
                             features.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into natural
                             features, such as mountains, oceans, and rivers and cultural features,
                             such as buildings, restaurants, roads, and stores.

              K.G.3          Describe and compare the cultural and natural environment around
                             one’s home and school by constructing a visual representation.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                             cultural and natural features in the students’ community vary from
                             one place to another, and to create a map or other representation to
                             communicate those differences.

              Standard 3: Utilize the college and career skills of an economist to understand how
              economic decisions affect one’s personal community.
              Enduring Understanding: Fundamental economic concepts introduced in
              kindergarten are developed throughout social studies education and impact one’s
              everyday choices.
              The student will:
              K.E.1         Identify and compare wants and needs.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                             differences between wants and needs and that different individuals
                             have different wants and needs.

Economics K.E.2              Explain how wants and needs change over time.

                             This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how wants and
                             needs change as individuals grow and change.

              K.E.3          Explain why people have jobs, and describe the economic benefits for
                             self and community.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how jobs
                             allow community members to have consumer choice and to meet
                             individual needs.

              K.E.4          Identify an economic want or need at one’s school or community
                             level and create a solution.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 10
Key Concept
                                                     Standards


                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into real world
                             economic wants and needs and encourage hands-on practice to find
                             possible solutions.

              Standard 4: Utilize the college and career skills of a political scientist to understand
              and display civic dispositions in one’s personal community.
              Enduring Understanding: Attributes of responsible citizenship requires
              individuals of diverse cultural backgrounds to employ dispositions to promote
              strong relationships.
              The student will:
              K.CG.1         Identify similarities and differences between people and discuss ways
                             to protect and respect all people by practicing civic dispositions.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into diversity
                             within the classroom and community. Further, inquiry promotes
                             identifying civic dispositions (e.g., compassion, cooperation,
                             empathy, honesty, and respect) that are already exhibited in the
                             classroom setting and can be used for problem solving in the future.

              K.CG.2         Explain the purpose of rules and laws, and discuss consequences of
                             breaking them.
 Civics &
Government                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into identifying
                             rules and laws in the classroom, home, and the community and how
                             these rules are necessary for safety.

              K.CG.3         Establish and practice classroom rules and procedures for listening
                             and responding appropriately to others.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into identifying
                             civic dispositions (e.g., compassion, cooperation, empathy, honesty,
                             and respect). Further, inquiry promotes the discussion of rules already
                             in place, the creation of rules, and habits needed for civil discourse.

              K.CG.4         Collaborate with others to identify a classroom or school issue and
                             propose a resolution using civic dispositions.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into identifying
                             real world classroom or school problems and practice a hands-on
                             approach when finding solutions. This practice furthers inquiry
                             through civic dispositions necessary when working with others.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 11
Grade 1

Life in South Carolina

Students in the primary grades (kindergarten–second grade) are building the foundation of social
studies skills and themes that will follow them through grade 12 to prepare them for college and
career. Despite there being a different overall focus for each grade level, students in primary
grades will be exposed to the following themes of social studies in their courses: history,
geography, economics, and civics and government. As students develop cognitively, these
themes become more focused based on the grade-level content in order to prepare students for
college and career.

Grade one students continue their social studies experience by examining ways their community
is a part of the state of South Carolina. By studying different geographic and economic features
of the state, students will use skills of a social studies thinker when inquiring into the diversity of
the state. Instruction should utilize the specific thinking skills of a historian, geographer,
economist, and political scientist, developed for grade one. The progression of developmentally
appropriate thinking skills begins in kindergarten and builds with each year of social studies
instruction. The disciplinary skills, themes, and content knowledge work together to support the
goals of the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate.

The primary grade-level social studies standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-
specific themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to
teach thematically, and to support project or problem based learning. To encourage inquiry, the
grade one Life in South Carolina standards are constructed around the following four themes:

History – History in the primary grades encourages the use of evidence to study comparison,
continuity, and changes while scaffolding content from community to nation.
Geography – Geography in the primary grades encourages the study of Earth as a home for
humans and how they interact with it.
Economics – Economics in the primary grades encourages the study of wants and needs,
scarcity, and supply and demand as a basis for understanding how economic decisions affect
students’ lives.
Civics and Government – Civics and Government in the primary grades encourages the study
of a citizen’s role and responsibility, including the study of rules, authority, and consequences
within their communities.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 12
                                    Grade 1 Standards

Key Concept
                                                     Standards
              Standard 1: Utilize the college and career skills of a historian to study continuity
              and change over time in South Carolina.
              Enduring Understanding: The similarities and differences within South Carolina,
              and the exploration of associated patterns between them, allow students to develop
              the foundational understanding that history involves continuities and changes in
              people from all backgrounds, and that patterns of history develop over time.
              The student will:
              1.H.1        Identify similarities and differences between one’s community and
                           other South Carolina communities over time.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the defining
                            characteristics of a students’ own community. Further, inquiry should
                            include the finding of similarities and differences among communities
                            throughout South Carolina to build comparison skills for historical
                            inquiry.
  History
              1.H.2         Analyze a current event in South Carolina and make predictions about
                            possible outcomes.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes and
                            effects of current events specific to South Carolina, such as a recent
                            weather experience or a new law. This promotes further inquiry into
                            how events have affected their own lives and community.

              1.H.3         Evaluate different sources of evidence used in historical inquiry, such
                            as art, artifacts, digital sources, graphs, maps, oral histories,
                            photographs/images, and texts.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into evaluating and
                            utilizing primary sources as sources of knowledge to learn about South
                            Carolina.

          Standard 2: Utilize the college and career skills of a geographer to apply map skills
          and draw conclusions about places in South Carolina and South Carolina’s place in
          the surrounding region.
Geography Enduring Understanding: By studying South Carolina’s diverse physical
          geography and the state’s location relative to other places in the United States,
          students begin to develop an understanding that humans interact with the various
          features of Earth and consequently create different cultural, economic, and historical
          landscapes.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 13
Key Concept
                                                     Standards


              The student will:
              1.G.1      Identify various types of maps, map features, and the purpose of maps.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into a variety of
                            maps (e.g., maps of malls, roads, schools, zoos, and the world) and the
                            purpose of different types of maps. Further, inquiry is made into map
                            features (e.g., map title, map key/legend, and compass rose) and how
                            they are tools in geographic inquiry.

              1.G.2         Identify and describe the geographic location of South Carolina in
                            relation to the rest of the United States through the use of various maps
                            and geographic tools.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into a variety of
                            sources used to investigate and compare the location of South Carolina
                            to the rest of the United States.

              1.G.3         Identify and differentiate between rural, suburban, and urban areas
                            within South Carolina.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                            characteristics of urban, rural, and suburban areas within South
                            Carolina.

              1.G.4         Describe and compare various landforms within South Carolina
                            through the use of primary and secondary sources.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into a variety of
                            sources used to investigate and compare different landforms (e.g.,
                            coastlines, lakes, mountains, and rivers) within South Carolina.

          Standard 3: Utilize the college and career skills of an economist to understand how
          economic decisions affect South Carolinians.
          Enduring Understanding: By exploring how the availability of resources
          influences economic conditions in South Carolina, students begin to understand how
          resources impact the personal economic decisions that individuals make.
Economics
          The student will:
          1.E.1        Compare goods and services in the school, community, and state.

                            This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the differences
                            between goods and services. The indicator also encourages inquiry into

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 14
Key Concept
                                                     Standards
                            the identification of goods as items for purchase (e.g. school lunch) and
                            services as actions that benefit others.
              1.E.2         Explain how goods and services change over time.

                            This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the goods and
                            services relevant to one’s own life, such as cell phones and computers,
                            and how their relevance is affected by an individual’s changing wants
                            and need. (This indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into the
                            relationship wants and needs and their relationship to goods and
                            services...)

              1.E.3         Research and describe how goods and services differ in rural, suburban,
                            and urban areas in South Carolina.

                            This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how goods and
                            services vary in different communities. This indicator was also
                            designed to promote inquiry into the identification of the goods and
                            services available in their community and compare these to other South
                            Carolina communities, such as farming in rural communities and
                            shipping in coastal communities.

              1.E.4         Identify an economic want or need at the local or state level and create
                            a solution in the form of a good or a service.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how economic
                            decisions influence everyday life. Inquiry is also encouraged through
                            finding achievable ways to support one’s community, such as making
                            posters to promote recycling.

              Standard 4: Utilize the college and career skills of a political scientist to understand
              and display civic dispositions about contemporary South Carolina.
              Enduring Understanding: Responsible citizenship requires individuals of diverse
              cultural backgrounds to employ dispositions that promote strong relationships.
              The student will:
              1.CG.1       Demonstrate how civic dispositions encourage citizens with diverse
 Civics &                  beliefs and backgrounds to work together for a common goal.
Government
                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into working with
                            others with stories different from their own. This indicator was also
                            developed to encourage inquiry into the identification of examples of
                            this behavior that are already occurring and how to use civic
                            dispositions to better accomplish a task.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 15
Key Concept
                                                     Standards


              1.CG.2        Describe the basic purpose, structure, and functions of South Carolina’s
                            government at both the local and state level.

                            This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the hierarchy of
                            local and state government, how they work together, and the basic
                            responsibilities they have for the people of South Carolina.

              1.CG.3        Demonstrate ways to display active and responsible citizenship in local
                            and state government.

                            This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into how to be an active
                            citizen. The indicator was also developed to encourage inquiry through
                            examples of citizenship within one’s school, the community, and at the
                            state level.

              1.CG.4        Collaborate with others to identify, resolve, and communicate
                            resolutions on a local or state issue.

                            This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into community and
                            state issues. The indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into
                            state issues by using one’s own experiences, connecting with other
                            classrooms across the state, or viewing appropriate news sources.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 16
Grade 2

Life in the United States

Students in the primary grades (kindergarten–second grade) are building the foundation of social
studies skills and themes that will follow them through grade 12 to prepare them for college and
career. Despite there being a different overall focus for each grade level, students in primary
grades will be exposed to the following themes of social studies in their courses: history,
geography, economics, and civics and government. As students develop cognitively, these
themes become more focused based on the grade-level content in order to prepare students for
college and career.

Students in grade two will employ social studies skills as they begin to explore how South
Carolina is a part of a larger entity with many similar customs, physical features, and economic
and political concerns. Instruction should utilize the specific thinking skills of a historian,
geographer, economist, and political scientist, developed for grade two. The progression of
developmentally appropriate thinking skills begins in kindergarten and builds with each year of
social studies instruction. The disciplinary skills, themes, and content knowledge work together
to support the goals of the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate.

The primary grade-level social studies standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-
specific themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to
teach thematically, and to support project or problem based learning. To encourage inquiry, the
grade two Life in the United States standards are constructed around the following four themes:

History – History in the primary grades encourages the use of evidence to study comparison and
continuity and changes while scaffolding content from community to nation.
Geography – Geography in the primary grades encourages the study of Earth as a home for
humans and how they interact with it.
Economics – Economics in the primary grades encourages the study of wants and needs,
scarcity, and supply and demand as a basis for understanding how economic decisions affect
students’ lives.
Civics and Government – Civics and Government in the primary grades encourages the study
of a citizen’s role and responsibility, including the study of rules, authority, and consequences
within their communities.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 17
                                     Grade 2 Standards

Key Concept                                      Standards
              Standard 1: Utilize the college and career skills of a historian to study the
              continuity and changes over time in the United States.
              Enduring Understanding: Students will employ the historical thinking skills of
              comparison, cause and effect, continuities and changes, and sourcing to study the
              diversity of the United States.
              The student will:
              2.H.1      Identify and compare significant historical events, moments, and
                         symbols in U.S. history.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into historical
                         events, including figures, symbols, and observances, that have been
                         important to the U.S. over time as well as how they impact us.

              2.H.2      Examine current or past events from U.S. history, and discuss the
                         possible causes and effects.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into multiple causes
                         and effects of events in U.S. history. This indicator also promotes
  History                inquiry into how to practice appropriate group discussion and civic
                         dispositions, especially related to citizens’ roles in current events.

              2.H.3      Analyze patterns of continuities and changes within U.S. history
                         through the use of a variety of sources, including graphic organizers,
                         maps, oral histories, photographs/images, texts, and timelines.

                         This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into changes that
                         occur over various periods of time and recognize patterns in history.
                         The indicator was also developed to encourage the exposure to
                         resources, such as charts, graphs, timelines, and tables.

              2.H.4      Evaluate different forms of evidence used in historical inquiry and
                         determine their validity.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how to
                         critically evaluate sources for validity. The indicator was also
                         developed to promote inquiry into how to ensure data is accurate,
                         citable, complete, credible, current, and objective.

              Standard 2: Utilize the college and career skills of a geographer to apply map
Geography
              skills and draw conclusions about the United States.


 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 18
Key Concept                                      Standards
              Enduring Understanding: The availability of resources and the physical
              features associated with them vary in different locations around the U. S.
              Students will connect these resources with various economic activities.
              The student will:
              2.G.1      Identify the geographic location of the U. S. in relation to the rest of
                         the world.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the location of
                         the U.S. on various maps and globes. This indicator promotes further
                         inquiry into bordering nations and oceans.

              2.G.2      Describe and compare various landforms over time within the U.S.
                         through the use of primary and secondary sources.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into using historic
                         images, maps, narratives, texts, or video, to investigate and compare
                         different landforms around the U.S.

              2.G.3      Explain how the distribution of human features, physical features, and
                         natural resources within the U. S changes over time and impacts
                         economic activity.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how rivers,
                         lakes, mountains, and other land features affect economic activity. This
                         indicator also prompts students to explore how different geographic
                         areas support different activities in different times due the availability
                         of resources.

              Standard 3: Utilize the college and career skills of an economist to understand
              how economic decisions affect citizenship within the United States.
              Enduring Understanding: Creating and utilizing budgets are a foundation to
              becoming financially literate. Students will analyze components of budgeting,
              including wants and needs, to develop foundational financial literacy skills.
              The student will:
              2.E.1      Examine the purpose of currency and how income, savings, and
Economics                spending are parts of a budget.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the purpose of
                         currency and how currency is related to economic activity. The
                         indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into decision-making
                         concerning spending and saving money.

              2.E.2      Explain how budgets change as wants and needs or the availability of

 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 19
Key Concept                                      Standards
                         goods and services change.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into economic
                         decision making, specifically how choices are made based on both
                         wants and needs and the availability of goods and services.

              2.E.3      Create a simple budget, and articulate the priorities using economic
                         terms such as expenses, income, and savings.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into different
                         factors that must be considered when creating a budget.

              2.E.4      Interpret data to show how geographic location and available resources
                         impact economic decision-making.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how location is
                         related to resources and economics as resources change temporally in
                         addition to vary spatially.

              Standard 4: Responsible citizenship requires individuals of diverse cultural
              backgrounds to employ dispositions that promote strong relationships to develop
              solutions to communal problems.
              Enduring Understanding: Students will develop the skills necessary to address
              shared problems in a respectful and productive manner.
              The student will:
              2.CG.1 Identify cultural and ethnic groups in the U. S., explore their
                         characteristics, and communicate how civic dispositions build
                         relationships between groups in a diverse society.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how civic
  Civics &
                         dispositions (i.e., compassion, cooperation, empathy, honesty, and
 Government              respect) support cooperation within a diverse society.

              2.CG.2     Use primary and secondary sources to research a national figure who
                         demonstrated civic dispositions.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into past and
                         present national figures who demonstrated civic dispositions (i.e.,
                         compassion, cooperation, empathy, honesty, and respect) by exploring
                         a variety of sources, such as children’s literature, historic documents,
                         photographs and images, or news sources.

              2.CG.3     Analyze how rights are granted to U. S. citizens through the founding


 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 20
Key Concept                                        Standards
                         documents.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the rights that
                         are granted under the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and the First
                         Amendment to understand how these individual freedoms help form
                         the framework of our society.

              2.CG.4     Use evidence to propose and communicate a resolution to a national
                         issue.

                         This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into identifying and
                         proposing solutions to problems at the national level.




 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 21
Grade 3

World Geography

In grade three, students will explore the spatial distribution of Earth’s physical and human
features and how these features interact to make Earth their home. Earth’s natural features and
resources have both presented opportunities and constraints for how and where people have lived
on Earth, in turn influencing the development of different cultural expressions. A geographic and
skills-based study of the physical and human characteristics of places will bridge the skills
practiced in the primary grades to the subsequent content and thinking skills of later grades.

Instruction should utilize the specific geographic thinking skills and themes developed for grade
three. The progression of the developmentally appropriate geographic thinking skills begins in
kindergarten and builds with each year of geography instruction. These geographical thinking
skills are aligned with the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge,
world-class skills, and life and career characteristics. These skills have been deconstructed to aid
in the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The social studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to teach
thematically, and to support project or problem-based learning. To encourage inquiry, the grade
three World Geography standards are constructed around introducing students to the following
four themes:

Places and Regions (PR) – The PR theme encourages the study of the experiences of humans
organized into geographic regions. Regions describe places that are characterized by similar
physical and human conditions.

Environment and Resources (ER) – The ER theme encourages the study of Earth’s physical
systems (e.g., climate, landform, vegetation) and how human activities modify the environment,
bringing both benefits and costs. The distribution of natural resources varies spatially and
temporally, resulting in different political and economic relationships.

Human Systems (HS) – The HS theme encourages the study of various human activities and
characteristics across Earth’s surface. The spatial distribution and movement of populations and
the resultant changes form the basis of understanding. Cultural characteristics, economic
systems, political systems, and settlement patterns are further examples of how human
landscapes vary spatially.

Applied Geography (AG) – The AG theme encourages the study of how geographic literacy
and geographic skills, such as mapping, are used to solve problems. An understanding of past
and present spatial organizations of Earth enables people to better understand and plan for the
changes in human and physical phenomena in the future.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 22
                               Grade 3 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                         Expression
M: Mapping- Identify, use,        To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of mapping in the
interpret, and construct large-   study of geography, students should:
scale maps.                           ● identify and describe the properties and functions of
                                          maps.
                                      ● use a variety of paper and digital technologies to
                                          display and analyze geospatial data.
                                      ● interpret maps for understanding and problem-solving.
                                      ● construct maps using available technology for
                                          understanding and problem-solving.
MR: Models and                    To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of models and
Representations- Identify,        representations in the study of geography, students should:
use, interpret, and construct         ● identify and describe alternative methods of
basic geographic models and               displaying geospatial data.
other visual representations.         ● interpret and use models and representations for
                                          understanding and problem-solving.
                                      ● construct models and representations for
                                          understanding and problem-solving.
GE: Gather Evidence and           To demonstrate their ability to gather evidence and
Communicate Findings-             communicate findings in the study of geography, students
Identify, use, and interpret      should:
different forms of evidence,          ● identify, collect, and analyze geospatial data.
including primary and                 ● evaluate geospatial data and other data sources for
secondary sources.                        accuracy, quality, perspective, and value.
                                      ● synthesize and communicate findings using verbal,
                                          written, visual, or other appropriate forms.
CC: Conditions,                   To demonstrate their ability to recognize conditions and
Connections, and Regions-         connections in the study of geography, students should:
Identify and compare the              ● identify the physical and human conditions of places
development of conditions,                and the connections among places.
connections, and regions.             ● compare the physical and human conditions of places
                                          and the connections among places.
S: Scale- Identify spatial        To demonstrate their ability to understand scale in the study
hierarchies.                      of geography, students should:
                                      ● identify spatial hierarchies from local to global scale.
DP: Distribution and              To demonstrate their ability to understand distribution and
Patterns- Identify spatial        patterns in the study of geography, students should:
distributions, patterns, and          ● identify spatial distributions, patterns, and
associations.                             associations.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 23
                                    Grade 3 Standards
   Key Concept                                         Standards
                      Standard 1: Use maps and globes to categorize places and regions by
                      their human and physical conditions.
                      Enduring Understanding: Global citizenship begins with the initial
                      understanding of Earth’s major features and how geographic information
                      is used to learn about those features.
                      The student will:
                      3.1.1.AG Utilize an alphanumeric grid to locate the continents and
                                   oceans.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about the location
                                  of major physical features around the world by utilizing a
                                  basic grid (i.e., letters on one axis, numbers on the other) as
                                  preparation for learning latitude and longitude.

                      3.1.2.AG Locate the world’s four hemispheres (i.e., northern, southern,
 Map Skills and                eastern, and western) by using the major components of
    Earth’s                    latitude and longitude (i.e., the Equator, the Prime Meridian,
   Features                    lines of latitude (i.e., parallels), lines of longitude (i.e.,
                               meridians), and the International Date Line).

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about how the
                                  world is divided for mapping purposes when using latitude
                                  and longitude.

                      3.1.3.PR    Identify the spatial hierarchy of political and physical
                                  geographic features.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about spatial
                                  hierarchies (i.e., scale) to understand connections between
                                  Earth’s systems. Political features include cities, states, and
                                  countries. Physical features include forests, mountains,
                                  oceans, and rivers.

                      Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of Earth’s physical features
                      and ecosystems that affect human activities.
                      Enduring Understanding: Earth’s diverse physical landscape provides
                      the opportunity to discover how humans live and interact in various areas
Environment and       over time. Earth’s physical systems influenced human migration and
     People           lifestyles and led to the creation of a diverse world.
                      The student will:
                      3.2.1.ER Recognize and explain how physical features are distributed
                                   around the world.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 24
  Key Concept                                         Standards

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about the
                                  distribution of landforms, climates, and biomes around the
                                  world.

                      3.2.2.ER    Identify and analyze the ways people interact with the
                                  physical environment in different regions of the state, the
                                  country, and the world.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about a variety of
                                  geographic landforms, water bodies, and climate patterns
                                  around the world and how humans interact with them,
                                  including population distribution and settlement patterns.

                      3.2.3.ER    Identify spatial variations in climates around the world and
                                  recognize the relationship between climate and human
                                  activities.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about how climate
                                  affects decision-making regarding such factors as food,
                                  clothing, and shelter around the world.


                      Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the relationship between
                      Earth’s environmental hazards and human activities.
                      Enduring Understanding: Earth’s physical environment can have
                      profound effects on its inhabitants. Geographic information about
                      physical systems can be used to create a related safety plan in the event
                      of a natural disaster.
                      The student will:
                      3.3.1.ER Identify the range of natural hazards facing people and
                                   explain how some populations are more vulnerable than
                                   others.
Environment and
     People                       This indicator prompts students to consider the various
                                  threats to humans including earthquakes, floods, hurricanes,
                                  tornadoes, volcanoes, and wildfires, and how human actions
                                  (e.g., building in a floodplain) can increase exposure and
                                  loss.

                      3.3.2.ER    Use maps and other sources of geographic information to
                                  gather evidence and draw conclusions about patterns of
                                  natural disasters around the world.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about the

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 25
  Key Concept                                        Standards
                                  geographic locations and patterns of natural disasters around
                                  the world by using maps and other sources of geographic
                                  information. Location and pattern connections may include
                                  how earthquakes occur along fault lines and hurricanes form
                                  over warm water near the Equator.

                      3.3.3.AG Develop a natural disaster safety plan for a community.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about natural
                                  disasters that typically occur in a community and then
                                  develop a practical plan to protect the community.

                      Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of varied human cultural and
                      economic characteristics across Earth’s surface.
                      Enduring Understanding: The spatial distribution of Earth’s physical
                      features and natural resources influences the development of various
                      cultures and livelihoods.
                      The student will:
                      3.4.1.PR Investigate the cultural characteristics of places and regions
                                  around the world.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about how
                                  geography influences cultural characteristics around the
                                  world. Culture may be expressed by architecture, arts and
                                  literature, clothing, cuisine, language, and religion, among
                                  other items.

 Culture and          3.4.2.HS    Investigate the economic and land use characteristics of
  Economy                         places and regions around the world.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about how
                                  geography influences economic activities around the world.
                                  Economic livelihoods may be expressed by agriculture
                                  (subsistence, commercial), industry, and services.

                      3.4.3.AG Research and create a geographic representation of a
                               contemporary or historic group of people to communicate
                               findings about their cultural characteristics and livelihoods.

                                  This indicator prompts students to inquire about different
                                  ways to represent the distribution of various cultural
                                  characteristics, like belief systems, clothing, food, and
                                  shelter, and the varied ways in which people make a living in
                                  different world regions. Geographic representations may


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 26
  Key Concept                                         Standards
                                  include charts, graphs, maps, tables, or other visuals.

                      Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of how and why humans
                      have explored and migrated across Earth.
                      Enduring Understanding: Earth has been continuously explored for its
                      resources, a process that has resulted in cultural contact with both
                      positive and negative consequences. Culture groups across various world
                      regions continue to interact through economic, social, political, and
                      environmentally-driven migration.
                      The student will:
                      3.5.1.HS Investigate and explain the economic, social, and political
                                  motivations behind human exploration of Earth.

                                  This indicator prompts students to examine why humans
                                  have explored and occupied different world regions,
                                  including reasons such as resource exploration, the desire to
                                  spread religion, and empire-building.

                      3.5.2.AG Use maps and other geographic representations to identify
                               exploration patterns throughout Earth history.

                                  This indicator allows students to work with maps and
Exploration and                   mapping tools to show where exploration, as described in the
   Migration                      previous indicator, impacted various populations and
                                  cultures.

                      3.5.3.HS    Investigate and explain the economic, social, political, and
                                  environmental motivations behind human migration and how
                                  places can change as a result.

                                  This indicator prompts students to examine why humans
                                  have decided to migrate – voluntarily or involuntarily – to
                                  different world regions, including reasons related to work
                                  opportunities, social or political persecution, and changing
                                  environmental conditions.

                      3.5.4.AG Use maps and other geographic representations to identify
                               how migration patterns affect people and places.

                                  This indicator allows students to work with maps and
                                  mapping tools to show where migration, as described in the
                                  previous indicator, affects populations in both sending and
                                  receiving locations.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 27
Grade 4

United States & South Carolina Studies Part I

Students study the history of the United States and South Carolina in grade four, beginning with
the colonization of the United States and continuing through Reconstruction. South Carolina’s
role is integrated into the study of the exploration of the United States. Students will explore how
the United States and South Carolina cultivated common societies through the interaction among
different groups of people, the colonization of North America, independence from Great Britain,
founding principles, and the identity of a new nation. They will also investigate how cooperation
and conflict among people brought about change, led to the expansion of boundaries and
territories, a nation became divided in the Civil War, and how the nation and state dealt with the
consequences of the Civil War which resulted in Reconstruction.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade four,
several of which are being introduced to students for the first time. The progression of
developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten and builds with
each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with the Profile of the
South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life and career
characteristics. Starting in grade four, students will have the opportunity to apply these skills
with specific social studies content. The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by
students in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed
to aid in the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. This allows for teacher flexibility when long-range planning. These themes allow for
connections to be made between content when teaching chronologically, the ability to teach
thematically rather than chronologically, and to support project- or problem-based learning. To
encourage inquiry, the grade four United States and South Carolina Studies Part I standards are
constructed around the following four themes:

Development and Sustainment of a State and Nation – The Development and Sustainment of
a State and Nation theme encourages the study of the national and state political identities and
perspectives. National and state political identities and perspectives are based on the founding
principles contained in documents such as the Declaration of Independence, the Constitution, and
the Federalist Papers. These perspectives serve as the basis of both debate and compromise over
the course of the nation’s history.

Economic, Settlement, and Territorial Expansions – The Economic, Settlement, and
Territorial Expansions theme encourages the study of changing economic, social, and political
ideas within the United States and South Carolina. These expansions led to controversy,
compromise, extension of boundaries, and the economic change from mercantilism to capitalism.

Interaction Among People – The Interaction Among People theme encourages the study of
cultural interactions, economic development, and societal differences which resulted in distinct



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 28
perspectives within the regions of both the United States and South Carolina. Over time, these
exchanges have caused both unity and division.

Physical Geography and Natural Resources – The Physical Geography and Natural Resources
theme encourages the study of the migration of humans to different regions and how geography
influenced their way of life in a new place. As North America and South Carolina were settled,
changes in economic, political, environmental, and societal conditions occurred over time and in
different locations.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 29
                               Grade 4 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                       Expression
CO: Comparison- Identify        To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
comparisons based on            students should:
common or differing                 ● identify characteristics (i.e. who, what, where, why,
characteristics or contexts.            when, and how) of historical developments.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences between historical
                                        events, ideas, and/or characteristics.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences between political,
                                        economic, and/or geographic regions.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences of perspectives
                                        between groups of people.
CE: Causation- Identify         To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
multiple causes and effects,    students should:
to include distinguishing           ● identify multiple causes and effects (i.e. short-term and
long-term and short-term                long-term) for historical events.
examples.                           ● identify how previous events contributed to subsequent
                                        events.
                                    ● identify how history would be different if historical
                                        events had different outcomes.
P: Periodization- Organize a To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
historical narrative into time students should:
periods using units of time         ● identify and understand time periods using units of time
(e.g., decades, half-centuries,         (e.g., decades, half-centuries, and centuries).
centuries).                         ● organize major historical events chronologically.
                                    ● evaluate a historical narrative to identify its components.
                                    ● create a historical narrative to summarize major
                                        developments within a given time period.
CX: Context- Make               To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
connections between                 ● explain how historical events have a local impact.
historical developments in          ● explain how historical events have an impact beyond the
history using specific                  local area.
references to time, place, and      ● use evidence to explain the progression of historical
broader circumstances.                  events.
                                    ● make connections between historical events and current
                                        events.
CC: Continuities and            To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Recognize patterns changes, students should:
of historical continuity and        ● identify recurring patterns in historical events.
changes in history.                 ● identify changes in the patterns of historical events.
                                    ● identify continuities in the patterns of historical events.
E: Evidence- Identify,          To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of
source, and utilize different   history, students should:
forms of evidence, including        ● identify the difference between primary and secondary
primary and secondary                   sources.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 30
Indicator                        Expression
sources, used in an inquiry-        ● utilize primary and secondary sources to gather
based study of history.                information and make connections.
                                    ● identify how point of view, bias, and purpose allow for
                                       further understanding of a primary source.
                                    ● evaluate secondary sources for accuracy and validity.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 31
                                     Grade 4 Standards
Key Concept                                        Standards
                Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the settlement and colonization
                of North America, including South Carolina, between 1600–1730.
                Enduring Understanding: The various cultures, establishments, and
                settlements of North American colonies were a result of interactions and
                contributions primarily of Native Americans, Europeans, and enslaved Africans.
                The British North America colonies each developed a unique culture connected
                to their economic, geographic, and political resources and beliefs.
                The student will:
                4.1.CO          Compare the interactions among cultural groups as a result of
                                European colonization.

                                 This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how
                                 European colonization impacted the interaction among African,
                                 European, and Native American cultural groups.

                4.1.CE           Identify the effects of changing economic systems on the
                                 diverse populations in British North America.

                                 This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the effects
                                 of mercantilism and triangular trade on enslaved Africans,
Colonization
                                 Native Americans, and European colonists in North America
                                 and the Caribbean.

                4.1.P            Explain the development of political institutions and social
                                 characteristics that defined the British colonial regions.

                                 This indicator was written to promote inquiry into the unique
                                 development of ethnic, political, and religious identities in the
                                 New England, Mid-Atlantic, and Southern colonies.

                4.1.CX           Contextualize the experience of Africans, Europeans, and
                                 Native Americans in South Carolina.

                                 This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how
                                 South Carolina developed as a result of the relationship among
                                 various ethnic, political, and religious groups.

                4.1.CC           Identify patterns of change and continuity in the development
                                 of economic systems in British North America.

                                 This indicator was written to promote inquiry into the role of
                                 mercantilism in the growth of agriculture, early industry, harbor

 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 32
Key Concept                                       Standards
                                 development, shipping and trade, and slavery in the British
                                 colonies.

                4.1.E            Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and
                                 social developments of British North America and South
                                 Carolina.

                Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the identity of a new nation,
                including the state of South Carolina between 1730-1800.
                Enduring Understanding: Colonial revolt against British regulations and
                restrictions resulted in the creation of the United States as an independent nation
                comprised of individual states. Following the American Revolution, Americans
                developed a new form of government that embodied and contradicted the ideals
                for which they had fought and unified the new nation.
                The student will:
                4.2.CO            Compare the roles of marginalized groups during the American
                                  Revolution.

                                 This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 economic, political, and social roles of colonial groups, to
                                 include free and enslaved people of African descent, Native
                                 Americans, and women, during the revolutionary period.

                4.2.CE           Examine the economic and political motivations for colonists to
  A New                          declare independence from Great Britain.
  Nation
                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 influence of taxation and regulation in the colonial
                                 independence movement leading to the Declaration of
                                 Independence and the beginning of the American Revolution.

                4.2.P            Analyze the sequence of events that led to the establishment of
                                 the U. S. as a democratic republic.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 process which led to the formation of the U.S. government,
                                 including the convening of the Continental Congresses, the
                                 passage of the Articles of Confederation, and the adoption of
                                 the U.S. Constitution.

                4.2.CX           Contextualize South Carolina’s role in the development of the
                                 new nation.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into South


 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 33
Key Concept                                         Standards
                                 Carolina’s participation in the American Revolution and the
                                 subsequent creation of a new government.

                4.2.CC           Explain the continuities and changes in natural rights as seen
                                 from the French and Indian War to the creation of the Bill of
                                 Rights.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 Americans understood and enumerated natural rights from the
                                 period of salutary neglect through the American Revolution and
                                 into the first decade of the republic.

                4.2.E            Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and
                                 social developments of the new nation.

                Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the expansion and growth of
                South Carolina and the United States between 1800–1850.
                Enduring Understanding: The new century saw the U. S. being transformed
                through land acquisitions in the West, which provided some Americans with a
                hope for land ownership and a better life. The expansion also heightened and
                continued the debate on the legalities and expansion of slavery and significantly
                impacted Native Americans’ way of life.
                The student will:
                4.3.CO          Compare the motivations for and reactions to various
                                expeditions into the Western territories.

                                 This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 economic, political, and social reasons for Westward
  Expansion                      Expansion. It was also written to promote inquiry into how
     and                         various people living in the western territories responded to
 Sectionalism                    migration.

                4.3.CE           Analyze the effects of government policies in promoting United
                                 States territorial expansion into the west.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 government policy influenced Westward Expansion, including
                                 the purchase of the Louisiana Territory, policies towards Native
                                 Americans, the Mexican-American War, and support of railroad
                                 development.

                4.3.P            Analyze the role of technology and the environmental impact
                                 during the period of Westward Expansion.



 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 34
Key Concept                                         Standards
                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 technological advancements that supported Westward
                                 Expansion and the subsequent impacts on the environment,
                                 including the role of precious metals, advances in mining
                                 technology, and the invention of advanced transportation and
                                 communication.

                4.3.CX           Contextualize South Carolina’s role in the development of
                                 sectionalism during the antebellum period.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                                 debate surrounding the expansion of enslaved labor versus free
                                 labor influenced the development of sectionalism. This
                                 indicator was also developed to foster inquiry into the growth of
                                 the Abolitionist Movement leading up to the Civil War.

                4.3.CC           Recognize patterns of continuity and change in the experiences
                                 of Native Americans and Spanish-speaking people as the U. S.
                                 expanded westward.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 land acquisition and the resulting border changes of the U. S.
                                 impacted the people of the western territories prior to Westward
                                 Expansion.

                4.3.E            Analyze multiple perspectives of early westward expansion,
                                 including the addition of slave and free territories and states.

                Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of economic, political, and social
                divisions during the United States Civil War, including the role of South
                Carolina between 1850–1870.
                Enduring Understanding: Regional economic interests led to insurmountable
                political and social divisions during this time period. Sectionalism led the
                United States into a costly and devastating Civil War, which ultimately resulted
                in the preservation the United States of America.
 A Divided      The student will:
  Nation        4.4.CO           Compare the economic and political causes of the Civil War.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 debates over slavery led to the Civil War.

                4.4.CE           Explain the effects of military strategies utilized by the Union
                                 and the Confederacy.



 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 35
Key Concept                                          Standards
                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 effects of military strategies to include but not limited to:
                                 wartime technologies, the Anaconda Plan, conscription, and
                                 Sherman’s March to the Sea.

                4.4.P            Explain how emancipation was achieved as a result of civic
                                 participation.

                                 This indicator was developed to prompt inquiry into the role
                                 abolitionists played in influencing public opinion and urging
                                 policymakers to protect natural rights, which led to
                                 emancipation.

                4.4.CX           Contextualize South Carolina’s experience during the Civil
                                 War.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 relationship between the Civil War and the experiences of
                                 women, African Americans, and the planter class in South
                                 Carolina.

                4.4.CC           Identify and evaluate the economic, political, and social
                                 changes experienced throughout the Civil War.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 continuities and changes experienced by Americans of various
                                 genders, positions, races, and social status during the Civil War.

                4.4.E            Analyze the economic, political, and social divisions during the
                                 Civil War.

                Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the contributions different
                groups made to impact the economic, political, and social developments during
                Reconstruction of the United States and South Carolina in the period of 1860–
                1880.
                Enduring Understanding: The United States faced multiple challenges in the
                planning and implementation of laws designed to reshape the nation following
                the Civil War. Economic, political, and social forces provided unique regional
 Rebuilding
                successes and failures, which ultimately resulted in a compromise to
                demilitarize the southern states leading to a turbulent reaction to Reconstruction
                and the design of new laws to reverse many of the advances achieved by post-
                Civil War legislation.
                The student will:
                4.5.CO           Compare the roles of various groups on Reconstruction.


 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 36
Key Concept                                         Standards
                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 interactions between various groups to include northerners and
                                 southerners, such as African Americans, white landowners,
                                 politicians, and business leaders during Reconstruction.

                4.5.CE           Analyze the impact of federal legislation on the South during
                                 Reconstruction.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 new federal laws impacted the South during Reconstruction, to
                                 include the effects of the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments.

                4.5.P            Summarize Reconstruction as a turning point in American
                                 history.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into
                                 founding principles as viewed through this period of federal
                                 government involvement, the development and realignment of a
                                 new labor system not based on a system of slavery, and the
                                 significant political realignment of the South.

                4.5.CX           Contextualize the economic, labor, political, and social
                                 conditions in South Carolina during the period of
                                 Reconstruction.

                                 This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into South
                                 Carolina’s unique experience, to include the Port Royal
                                 Experiment and the adoption of the state Constitution of 1868.

                4.5.CC           Identify and evaluate the impact of economic, political, and
                                 social events on the African American experience throughout
                                 Reconstruction.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 Reconstruction resulted in the foundation for the struggle for
                                 civil rights. This indicator was also developed to foster inquiry
                                 into Reconstruction Era policies such as Constitutional
                                 amendments, black codes, and Jim Crow Laws.

                4.5.E            Analyze multiple perspectives of the economic, political, and
                                 social effects of Reconstruction on different populations in the
                                 South and in other regions of the U. S.




 South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
 Page 37
Grade 5

United States & South Carolina Studies Part II

Students continue their study of the history of the United States and South Carolina in grade five,
beginning with the industrialization of the United States and continuing through the present day.
South Carolina’s role is integrated into the exploration of the history of the United States.
Students will study the industrialization of the United States and South Carolina, the impact
immigrants had on the cultural and economic landscape, the rise of the United States as a world
power, the nation’s involvement in world affairs in the 20th century, and the nation’s leadership
role after World War II, during and after the Cold War, and into the 21st century. They will also
learn about how citizens dealt with urbanization and increased population, women’s suffrage and
civil rights for all Americans, economic depression and recovery, and challenges in foreign
diplomacy.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade five. The
progression of developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten and
builds with each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with the
Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life
and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by students
in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in
the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. This allows for teacher flexibility when long-range planning. These themes allow for
connections to be made between content when teaching chronologically, the ability to teach
thematically rather than chronologically, and to support project- or problem -based learning. To
encourage inquiry, the grade five United States and South Carolina Studies Part II standards are
constructed around the following four themes:

Economic Advancements – The Economic Advancements theme encourages the study of the
United States’ development as an economic leader through technological advances, growth of
capitalism, and involvement of government. How South Carolina has and continues to contribute
to the national economic success will also be explored.

Expansion and Migration – The Expansion and Migration theme encourages the study of the
push- and pull -factors behind the movement of various groups to and throughout the United
States. This includes their abilities to adapt to and transform their new social and physical
environments.

Political Ideas and Institutions – The Political Ideas and Institutions theme encourages the
study of how the founding principles of natural rights, federalism, and rule of law have been
applied during this period of the United States and South Carolina. Political values and
government institutions have influenced society and government through the creation of
domestic and foreign policies.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 38
Social and Cultural Development – The Social and Cultural Development theme encourages
the study of how various social and cultural groups in the United States and South Carolina have
influenced society and government. Citizens have developed multifaceted national and state
identities based on individual ethnic, political, racial, regional, and religious differences.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 39
                             Grade 5 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                       Expression
CO: Comparison- Generate        To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
comparisons based on            students should:
common or differing                 ● identify characteristics (i.e. who, what, where, why,
characteristics or contexts.           when, and how) of historical developments.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences between historical
                                       events, ideas, and/or characteristics.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences between political,
                                       economic, and/or geographic regions.
                                    ● identify similarities and/or differences of perspectives
                                       between groups of people.
                                    ● identify how historical events affect the United States
                                       and South Carolina similarly and differently.
CE: Causation- Analyze          To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
multiple causes and effects,    students should:
to include distinguishing           ● identify multiple causes and effects (i.e. short-term and
long-term and short-term               long-term) for historical events.
examples.                           ● interpret the long-term effects of historical events.
                                    ● interpret the short-term effects of historical events.
                                    ● analyze how previous events contributed to subsequent
                                       events.
                                    ● identify how history would be different if historical
                                       events had different outcomes.
P: Periodization- Organize a To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
historical narrative into time students should:
periods using units of time         ● categorize historical events into blocks of time (e.g.,
(e.g., decades, half-centuries,        decades, half-centuries, centuries).
centuries).                         ● organize major historical events chronologically.
                                    ● evaluate a historical narrative to identify its components.
                                    ● create a historical narrative to summarize major
                                       developments within a given time period.
CX: Context- Describe           To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
historical developments             ● explain how historical events affect the United States.
using specific references to        ● explain how historical events affect South Carolina.
time, place, and broader            ● use evidence to explain the progression of historical
circumstances.                         events.
                                    ● make connections between historical events to current
                                       events.
CC: Continuities and            To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Recognize patterns changes, students should:
of historical continuities and      ● identify patterns of change and continuity in historical
changes, and identify turning          events.
points in history.                  ● identify turning points in historical events
E: Evidence- Identify,          To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 40
Indicator                        Expression
source, and utilize different    history, students should:
forms of evidence, including         ● identify the differences between primary and secondary
primary and secondary                    sources.
sources, used in an inquiry-         ● utilize primary and secondary sources to gather
based study of history.                  information and make connections.
                                     ● identify how point of view, bias, and purpose allow for
                                         further understanding of a primary source.
                                     ● evaluate secondary sources for accuracy and validity.
                                     ● categorize multiple sources to make a claim.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 41
                                    Grade 5 Standards
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
               Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the economic, political, and social
               effects of expansion and industrialization on the United States and South Carolina
               between 1860–1910.
               Enduring Understanding: The Second Industrial Revolution, urbanization, and
               access to resources contributed to the expansion of the United States during this time
               period. At the same time, groups migrated to and within the United States creating
               tensions and adding to the rich culture of the nation.
               The student will:
               5.1.CO      Compare the physical landscape and demographics of the U.S. before and
                           after the Transcontinental Railroad.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the physical
                           landscape of the U.S. changed due to the building of the Transcontinental
                           Railroad. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how human movement
                           and settlement into the American west greatly affected the physical
                           landscape.

               5.1.CE      Examine push- and pull-factors related to immigration and expansion on
                           urban and rural populations during the period.
Expansion
  and                      This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into why and how various
Migration                  peoples immigrated to the U.S. Furthermore, this indicator was designed to
                           promote inquiry into how these immigrant cultures influenced American
                           culture and society.

               5.1.P       Summarize how the United States’ involvement in the Spanish American
                           War led to increased U.S. economic expansion and imperialism.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the U. S.
                           territory and businesses expanded during the late 19th century.
                           Furthermore, it is designed to promote inquiry into how, by the end of the
                           Spanish American War, the U.S. began to expand overseas markets and
                           compete with the growing European markets and industrial growth.

               5.1.CX      Contextualize how the Second Industrial Revolution led to an increased
                           desire for raw materials and the United States involvement in imperialistic
                           efforts and economic expansion.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how industrialization
                           evolved in the U.S. and South Carolina during the late 19th century and
                           into the early 20th century. This indicator was also designed to promote

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 42
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
                           inquiry into how poor living and working conditions in urban areas led to
                           the rise of Progressivism in the U.S.

               5.1.CC      Summarize how imperialism and economic expansion impacted the
                           experiences of different groups and shaped American cultural identities.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the economy of
                           the United States grew during the time period. Topics for inquiry may
                           include the impact of population growth on production, working
                           conditions, and the subsequent labor movements to 1910.

               5.1.E       Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and social effects
                           of western expansion, the Industrial Revolution, and immigration through
                           primary and secondary sources, and evaluate the subsequent changes to the
                           U. S.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of how international events and conditions
               during the early 20th Century (i.e., 1910–1940) affected the United States and South
               Carolina.
               Enduring Understanding: In the early 20th Century, the economies of the United
               States and South Carolina experienced a boom-and-bust period. This situation led to
               significant government intervention in order to stimulate the economy.
               The student will:
               5.2.CO      Compare the cultural and economic impacts of the 1929 Stock Market
                           Crash on the U. S. and South Carolina.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how life changed in
                           the U.S. and South Carolina after the stock market crash of 1929. The
                           indicator was also developed to promote inquiry into how life in the 1920s
 Federal
                           differed from life in the 1930s in both the U.S. and South Carolina.
Expansion
               5.2.CE      Examine the primary causes of World War I and the events which led to
                           U.S. involvement.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the rise of
                           ideologies in Europe led to division and conflict among nations resulting in
                           World War I. Further, inquiry is encouraged through the exploration of the
                           changing position of the U.S. from the beginning of the war in Europe to its
                           eventual involvement.

               5.2.P       Summarize how the role of the federal government expanded during the
                           period.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 43
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how wartime
                           government activities, the Progressive Movement, and the New Deal
                           represented an expansion of federal power, including attempts to protect
                           citizens.

               5.2.CX      Contextualize the post-war economic climate on the cultural landscape
                           throughout the United States and South Carolina.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into post World War I
                           changes in the U.S., including the “Roaring Twenties,” the Harlem
                           Renaissance, the role of women outside of the home, and cultural changes
                           for African Americans.

               5.2.CC      Examine the continuities and changes that resulted from New Deal
                           programs and the impact these programs had on various groups throughout
                           the U. S. and South Carolina.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the role of the
                           government expanded during the Great Depression through the
                           implementation of government programs. The indicator encourages inquiry
                           into New Deal programs such as the Federal Deposit Insurance
                           Corporation, Civilian Conservation Corps, Social Security Administration,
                           Securities and Exchange Commission, and Tennessee Valley Authority.

               5.2.E       Evaluate multiple perspectives from the period, including the economic,
                           political, and social impacts of World War I, the 1920s, the Great
                           Depression, and the New Deal using primary and secondary sources.

               Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the economic, political, and social
               effects of World War II, the Holocaust, and their aftermath (i.e., 1930–1950) on the
               United States and South Carolina.
               Enduring Understanding: Along with the rest of the world, the United States and
               South Carolina experienced economic instability during this period. As a result,
               political instability and worldwide conflict consumed the world in the 1940s.
America        Following World War II, the United States emerged as a world leader through political
  as a         policies and economic growth.
 World
               The student will:
Leader
               5.3.CO      Compare the ideologies and policies that led to World War II.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the ideologies and
                           policies that led to WWII, with a particular focus on the rise of dictators
                           throughout Europe and Asia.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 44
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
               5.3.CE      Analyze the cause and effect of government-sponsored policies within the
                           United States and Europe related to the status of different groups, to
                           include the Holocaust.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the state-sponsored
                           persecution that led to the Holocaust in Europe. This indicator was also
                           developed to promote inquiry into the fight against discrimination toward
                           marginalized groups in America.

               5.3.P       Summarize the U.S. government’s transition away from neutrality policies
                           following World War I that led to its eventual involvement in World War
                           II.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the U.S.
                           government viewed its position in world affairs. Further, inquiry is
                           encouraged through a focus on governmental policies such as Lend Lease,
                           the Neutrality Acts of the 1930s, and the peacetime draft.

               5.3.CX      Contextualize the technological and geographic influence on military
                           strategies in the Pacific and European theaters of war of World War II.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how geography
                           played a role in the military strategy in the European and Pacific theaters.
                           The indicator was also developed to encourage inquiry into such strategies
                           as island hopping, the use of technological advancements, and effects of a
                           three front war.

               5.3.CC      Analyze the changes and continuities regarding the United States’
                           international leadership during the period, including the rebuilding of
                           Europe and the resettlement of displaced persons resulting from the
                           Holocaust.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how America’s
                           international leadership evolved before, during, and after World War II.
                           This indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into the different
                           alliances that were formed by the United States, Great Britain, and the
                           Soviet Union to include the Allied Powers, the United Nations, the North
                           Atlantic Treaty Organization, and the Warsaw Pact.

               5.3.E       Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and social effects
                           of World War II and its aftermath using primary and secondary sources.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 45
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
               Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of the conflicts, innovations, and social
               changes in the United States, including South Carolina, from 1950–1980.
               Enduring Understanding: The United States during the post-World War II period
               was dominated by a power conflict that pitted former allies against each other over
               economic and political differences, which affected all aspects of American life at
               home and abroad. Additionally, various civil rights movements within the United
               States and South Carolina impacted society.
               The student will:
               5.4.CO     Compare and contrast the capitalist and communist ideologies.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the lifestyles of
                           those living in capitalist countries differed from those living in communist
                           countries. This indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into how the
                           rights of citizens differed in capitalist and communist countries.

               5.4.CE      Analyze the causes and impacts of social movements in the U. S. and South
                           Carolina.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into growth and influence
                           of the various modern civil rights movements including, but not limited to,
                           African Americans, Chicano, Native Americans, and women.
 Social
Changes        5.4.P       Summarize the economic, political, and social changes in the U. S. after
                           World War II.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how social changes
                           such as suburbanization, the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944 (i.e.,
                           G.I. Bill), and the move to desegregation affected life in America.

               5.4.CX      Contextualize the tension between the United States and the Soviet Union
                           during the Cold War.

                           This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the United
                           States’ and Soviet Union’s governments adopted different ideologies
                           leading to distrust and tension. This indicator was also developed to
                           encourage inquiry into the events surrounding the Cold War, such as the
                           space race, the arms race, and proxy wars (i.e., Korean and Vietnam Wars).

               5.4.CC      Analyze the continuities and changes of race relations in the United States
                           and South Carolina following the Supreme Court decisions of Briggs v.
                           Elliott and Brown v. Board of Education.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how race relations in
                           the U. S. changed due to the ruling of Brown v. Board of Education. This

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 46
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
                           indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into how the efforts of civil
                           rights groups and leaders helped to promote racial equality throughout the
                           United States.

               5.4.E        Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and social effects
                            of the Cold War, Space Race, and Civil Rights Movement using primary
                            and secondary sources.
               Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the contemporary global economic,
               social, and political roles of the United States and South Carolina from 1980–present.
               Enduring Understanding: Since the collapse of the Soviet Union and advancements
               in technology, the world has become more globally interdependent. Additionally, with
               the rise of terrorism following the September 11, 2001, attacks, foreign policy in the
               United States has evolved.
               The student will:
               5.5.CO       Compare and contrast the focus of the U.S. as a world leader before and
                            after the September 11, 2001, attacks.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the U. S.
                           continued to assume the role as a world leader before and after the terror
                           attacks of September 11, 2001. This indicator was also designed to promote
                           inquiry into how the U.S. focused its foreign policy on fighting terror
                           following the September 11, 2001, attacks.

               5.5.CE      Analyze the impact of digital technologies on the U.S., and describe the
                           impact those technologies had on its global influence.
Modern
America
                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how technological
                           advancements allowed the U.S. to become more globally connected. This
                           indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into how the expansion of
                           technology through the Internet led to e-commerce.

               5.5.P       Summarize the global involvement of the U.S. using the fall of the Soviet
                           Union as a turning point.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the U.S. became role
                           in the economic and political aspects of global affairs. This indicator was
                           also designed to promote inquiry into how the U.S. established itself as a
                           leading partner in handling global conflicts.

               5.5.CX      Contextualize the changes in rural communities in South Carolina within
                           national and global industries.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how the development
                           of the Internet and the expansion of technology created change in rural

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 47
  Key
                                                      Standards
Concepts
                           areas. This indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into how the
                           expansion of industry has affected rural areas.

               5.5.CC      Analyze the continuities and changes in U.S. relationships with countries
                           around the world as a result of the economic, political, and social changes
                           in this period.

                           This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into how U.S.
                           relationships with other countries have developed since the collapse of the
                           Soviet Union.

               5.5.E       Analyze multiple perspectives on the economic, political, and social effects
                           of global interdependence after 1980 using primary and secondary sources.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 48
Grade 6

World Civilizations

Students will study World Civilizations to uncover trends from prehistory to present day.
Students will learn what defines civilizations and how geography played a factor in the
exchanges, expansion, and formation among and between them. Students will inquire about the
various social hierarchies of world civilizations and the changes and continuities of social
systems. Students will learn about ancient and classical civilizations and explore their enduring
cultural, intellectual, and technological influences. Students will learn about how increased
global interactions led to transformations among and between world civilizations. Students will
inquire into the development of world civilizations past and present and the connections between
Africa, the Americas, Asia, and Europe. Students will continue to explore how these global
interactions and exchanges led to cultural, intellectual, and technological advances that have
continued to increase societies’ global interconnectedness with one another.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade six. The
progression of developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten and
builds with each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with the
Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life
and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by students
in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in
the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content when teaching
chronologically, the ability to teach thematically rather than chronologically, and to support
project- or problem- based learning. To encourage inquiry, the grade six World Civilizations
standards are constructed around the following five themes:

Culture and Intellectual Development – The Culture and Intellectual Development theme
encourages the study of the development of individual and collective cultures and how these
identities shape economic, political, and social systems over time. Social systems of various
world civilizations are marked by their cultural, political, religious, and social ideologies and
contributions.

Global Exchanges – The Global Exchanges theme encourages the study of how world
civilizations have interacted with one another culturally, economically, and politically
throughout history, and how societies have become increasingly connected over time.

Interaction with Environment – The Interaction with Environment theme encourages the study
of how humans impact their environment and how environmental factors influence the decision-
making of humans.

Social Systems and Order – The Social Systems and Order theme encourages the study of
various social hierarchies and norms established by political and social institutions within a


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 49
given civilization. Humans have sustained and challenged through social systems, which
includes civic, economic, and social actions.

State Formation, Expansion, and Conflict – The State Formation, Expansion, and Conflict
theme encourages the study of the foundations of different states (e.g., kingdoms, empires,
nation-states, city-states) and how their interactions within and beyond those respective states
have emerged, expanded, and collapsed because of these factors.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 50
                                Grade 6 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                         Expression
CO: Comparison- Utilize           To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
broad characteristics of          students should:
historical developments to            ● distinguish similarities and differences among or between
create a comparative                     world civilizations.
analysis.                             ● categorize historical events according to similarities and
                                         differences.
CE: Causation- Analyze            To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
significant turning points in     students should:
history to assess multiple            ● identify major historical turning points.
long-term and short-term              ● analyze historical turning points to determine long- and
causes and effects.                      short-term causes and effects.
                                      ● analyze historical eras to determine relationships (e.g.,
                                         cause/effect, connections, and patterns) between eras.
                                      ● examine historical events to infer possible outcomes.
P: Periodization- Organize a      To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
historical narrative into time    students should:
periods using units of time           ● identify how significant events and related developments
(e.g., decades, half-centuries,          led to changes in historical periods.
centuries) and significant            ● create historical narratives based on units of time,
turning points.                          including major turning points.
CX: Context- Identify             To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
historical context by                 ● distinguish historical developments based on time and
analyzing historical                     place.
developments using specific           ● analyze how historical developments affect the world in
references to time, place, and           both historic and contemporary contexts.
broader circumstances.
CC: Continuities and              To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Identify and             changes, students should:
explain significant theme-            ● define theme-based continuities and changes.
based patterns of continuities        ● identify theme-based patterns of continuity and change.
and changes within a period           ● explain theme-based continuities and changes within a
of time.                                  period.
E: Evidence- Identify,            To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of
source, and utilize different     history, students should:
forms of evidence, including          ● identify and locate different forms of evidence and
primary and secondary                     ensure validity of the evidence.
sources, used in an inquiry-          ● engage in historical thinking skills to collect evidence
based study of history.                   from various sources that identifies bias, context, tone,
                                          purpose, and periodization.
                                      ● corroborate multiple sources.
                                      ● utilize different forms of evidence and multiple
                                          perspectives to make a claim.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 51
Indicator                        Expression
                                    ● cite evidence from multiple sources to support a claim.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 52
                                    Grade 6 Standards
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                      Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the organization and
                      transformation(s) of world civilizations to 550.
                      Enduring Understanding: Legacies of world civilizations include the arts,
                      governmental structures, science, and technology. World civilizations had
                      reciprocal influence on each other’s growth and development.
                      The student will:
                      6.1.CO       Compare the development of social systems among the early
                                   river valley civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to prompt inquiry into a
                                   comparison between the first agricultural revolutions on the
                                   development of social systems within early river civilizations.

                      6.1.CE       Summarize how environmental factors influenced the
                                   interactions within and between early civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into why and
                                   how world civilizations began to interact with one another and
                                   the results of those global exchanges.
   Civilizations
                      6.1.P        Analyze the shift from early to classical civilizations and the
                                   enduring contributions of classical civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into turning
                                   points in the organization and transformation of the four major
                                   classical civilizations in China, Greece, India, and Rome. This
                                   indicator was also developed to foster inquiry into the cultural
                                   and technological advancements of the classical civilizations
                                   that continue to influence modern societies.

                      6.1.CX       Contextualize the origins and spread of major world religions
                                   and their enduring influence.

                                   This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into the
                                   development, basic tenants, and impact of Buddhism,
                                   Christianity, Confucianism, Daoism, Hinduism, Islam, and
                                   Judaism in relation to place and time.

                      6.1.CC       Analyze changes and continuities that influenced the
                                   organization and technological advancements of early and

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 53
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                                   classical world civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into changes
                                   and continuities in the formation and expansion of early and
                                   classical world civilizations based on their interactions with
                                   their environments.

                      6.1.E        Analyze multiple perspectives on the political, intellectual, and
                                   social achievements of classical societies through a variety of
                                   primary and secondary sources.

                      Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the increased global
                      interactions among humans from the end of the classical era to the
                      invention of the printing press (i.e., 550–1450).

                      Enduring Understanding: World civilizations were developing more
                      complex economic, political, and social systems. As these civilizations
                      became more complex, their global interactions increased resulting in
                      various transformations.
                      The student will:
                      6.2.CO      Compare the political systems within world civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   different types of political systems around the world. Further,
                                   this indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the feudal
Increased Global                   systems in Japan and Europe, the political structure of the
  Interactions                     kingdoms in Asia and Africa, Imperial China, and the Central
                                   and South American Empires.

                      6.2.CE       Explain the impact of global exchanges among world
                                   civilizations.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                   environmental factors impacted world societies and
                                   encouraged interaction during the period.

                      6.2.P        Summarize the increased global exchanges among world
                                   societies using the Crusades as a major turning point.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   significance of the Crusades in expanding European trade
                                   networks. This indicator was also developed to promote


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 54
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                                   inquiry into the growth of the Ottoman Empire as a result of
                                   the Crusades.

                      6.2.CX       Contextualize the historical effects of the expansion of the
                                   Turks and Mongols on Europe and Asia.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   effects of Turk and Mongol expansion across Asia, North
                                   Africa, and much of the Byzantine Empire.

                      6.2.CC       Evaluate continuities and changes in cultural and economic
                                   interactions between societies in both West Africa and the
                                   Americas.

                                   This indicator was created to encourage inquiry into the
                                   development of the Mali and Ghana Kingdoms, including gold
                                   and salt mining and the connection to trade routes. This
                                   indicator was also written to promote inquiry into the
                                   development of the Mayan, Aztec, and Inca Empires, to
                                   include advancements in astronomy, engineering, and farming
                                   techniques

                      6.2.E        Analyze multiple perspectives on the increased interactions
                                   among and between world societies through a variety of
                                   primary and secondary sources.

                   Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the development of the
                   Atlantic World from the invention of the printing press to the Industrial
                   Revolution (i.e., 1450–1760).
                   Enduring Understanding: European expansion in the 15th through 18th
                   centuries was driven by a desire for economic and political dominance.
                   New technological advances made exploration possible. Exploration
                   increased global interactions, which resulted in significant economic,
  Development of political, and social transformations around the world. As a result,
the Atlantic World dominant societies emerged which led to a struggle for world power.
                   The student will:
                   6.3.CO      Compare European motivations for exploration and settlement.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into
                                   European motivations for exploration and settlement as a result
                                   of the closing of the Silk Road. This indicator was also written
                                   to foster inquiry into the development of the Atlantic World,


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 55
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                                   and the resulting economic, political, and social
                                   transformations in European, American, and African societies.

                      6.3.CE       Explain the impact of increased global exchanges on the
                                   development of the Atlantic World.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   growing interconnectedness between Europe, Africa, and the
                                   Americas, which led to increased global exchanges throughout
                                   the Atlantic World. The indicator also encourages inquiry into
                                   the development of human labor systems, cultural interactions,
                                   and the growth of economic markets.

                      6.3.P        Summarize the impact of the Transatlantic Slave Trade on
                                   ideological, political, and social systems in the Atlantic World.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   impact of the Transatlantic slave trade on Africa, Europe, and
                                   the Americas. This indicator promotes inquiry into the
                                   beginning of the Transatlantic slave trade, the ideological,
                                   economic, and political policies that upheld slavery, and how
                                   the slave trade led to the systematic oppression of Africans in
                                   the Atlantic World.

                      6.3.CX       Contextualize the experience of indigenous peoples due to
                                   expansion and the conflict that arose from it.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   impact of Transatlantic interaction with Europeans, Africans,
                                   and others on the indigenous populations of the Americas.

                      6.3.CC       Analyze the intellectual, political, and social changes in
                                   relation to the idea of individual rights from Humanism to the
                                   Enlightenment.

                                   This indicator was developed to analyze the changes and
                                   continuities that occurred in the cultural and intellectual
                                   developments of the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, the
                                   Scientific Revolution, the Protestant Reformation, and the
                                   Catholic Counter-Reformation.

                      6.3.E        Analyze the short and long term impact of the Atlantic World's
                                   growth using primary and secondary sources across multiple

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 56
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                                   perspectives.
                      Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of how increased global
                      exchanges promoted revolution from 1760 to the beginning of the 20th
                      Century.
                      Enduring Understanding: Global exchanges are characterized by
                      interaction within and between societies. As these exchanges increased,
                      economic, political, and social revolutions occurred resulting in
                      fundamental changes to economies, governments, and social hierarchies
                      around the world.
                      The student will:
                      6.4.CO       Compare the political revolutions which resulted from the
                                   Enlightenment

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                   the expansion of individual rights led to a period of political
                                   revolutions around the world from 1760–1820.

                      6.4.CE       Analyze the economic, political, and social impacts of
                                   colonialism and the rise of imperialism.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the rise
Global Exchanges                   of imperialism from 1820–1919. The indicator also promotes
 and Revolutions                   inquiry into how the birth of the Industrial Revolution and the
                                   resulting rise of colonialism and imperialism impacted the
                                   world significantly.

                      6.4.P        Summarize the local and global impacts of the Industrial
                                   Revolution.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the
                                   impact of the Industrial Revolution on economic, political, and
                                   social aspects of countries around the world from 1760–1919.

                      6.4.CX       Contextualize the environmental impact of the Industrial
                                   Revolution.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the
                                   relationship between the environment and the Agricultural
                                   Revolution, the Industrial Revolution, advanced technologies,
                                   and urbanization.

                      6.4.CC       Analyze the progression of nationalism in the 19th through the
                                   early 20th century.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 57
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards


                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the
                                   changes and continuities in political systems from1760–1919.
                                   This indicator also promotes inquiry into the spread of
                                   nationalism throughout the world.

                      6.4.E        Analyze multiple perspectives on increased global interactions
                                   and revolutions through a variety of primary and secondary
                                   sources.

                      Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the development of global
                      interdependence from 1920 to the present.
                      Enduring Understanding: The modern era has seen an increase in global
                      interdependence culturally, economically, and politically since 1920. The
                      advent of technology has fueled the interconnectedness of the world. Civil
                      rights and independence have been at the forefront of this era; however,
                      tensions remain in how to achieve these goals.
                      The student will:
                      6.5.CO       Compare the global movements that resulted in the
                                   advancement or limitation of human rights during the 20th and
                                   21st centuries.

                                   This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                   changes in human rights and social hierarchies. This indicator
                                   also prompts inquiry into the Women’s Suffrage Movement,
     Global                        the Civil Rights Movement, the independence movements in
Interdependence                    Africa, Asia, and India, and the end of Apartheid in South
                                   Africa.

                      6.5.CE       Explain the impact of nationalism on global conflicts and
                                   genocides in the 20th and 21st centuries.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the cause
                                   and effect relationship between nationalism and world wars.
                                   This indicator was also developed to promote inquiry into
                                   genocide, including the Holocaust, as well as the creation of
                                   the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the ensuing
                                   conflict that resulted from the creation of the state of Israel.

                      6.5.P        Analyze the impact of increased global interdependence using
                                   the Great Depression and Cold War as major turning points in
                                   the 20th century.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 58
  Key Concepts
                                                        Standards
                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the
                                   global impact of the Great Depression, using the Stock Market
                                   Crash of 1929 as a major turning point. This indicator was also
                                   developed to promote inquiry into the formation and expansion
                                   of states, including the function of supranational organizations,
                                   resulting from the Cold War.

                      6.5.CX       Contextualize various sustainability efforts amid increasing
                                   global interdependence.

                                   This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into how
                                   countries are addressing cultural, economic, and environmental
                                   issues in order to promote local sustainability in an
                                   interconnected world.

                      6.5.CC       Analyze the progression of technological developments and the
                                   resulting cultural diffusion throughout the 20th and 21st
                                   centuries.

                                   This indicator was developed to promote inquiry into the
                                   changes and continuities in cultural and communication
                                   technology from the invention of radio and telephone to the
                                   personal computer and internet. This indicator also supports
                                   inquiry into the changing role of technology at both the
                                   business, governmental, and personal levels.

                      6.5.E        Analyze multiple perspectives on global interdependence
                                   during the 20th and 21st centuries through a variety of primary
                                   and secondary sources.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 59
Grade 7

Geography of World Regions

Seventh grade students will study Earth from a regional perspective, focusing on the continents.
Students will study contemporary places and regions to identify how the experiences of people
are rooted in places and organized into geographic regions. Students will learn about Earth’s
physical conditions (e.g., climate, soils, vegetation) and how these features interact with Earth’s
other living features. This course also focuses on human systems and the sum of human activities
and characteristics (e.g., culture, ethnicity, gender, language, population, religion) that vary
across the Earth’s surface. These systems also include the spatial distribution of population and
the movement, settlement patterns, economic systems, and political systems. Students will
explore the interactions between environment and society to learn how human activities modify
Earth, how resources are used, and how physical systems, such as climate, present risks to
humans. These regional conditions, both physical and cultural, create unique landscapes, an
understanding of which lays the foundation for learning about connections to other peoples and
places on Earth.

There are multiple approaches that can be employed to teach these standards including teaching
the physical systems and human conditions (i.e., the first indicator in each standard) for each of
the continents in one unit or by interweaving indicators within one standard while teaching
regionally. If teaching regionally, the continents do not necessarily have to be taught in
alphabetical order as they are listed. Regardless of the approach, these standards and indicators
promote inquiry.

Instruction should utilize the geographical thinking skills and themes developed for grade seven.
The progression of developmentally appropriate geographical thinking skills begins in
kindergarten and builds with each year of geography instruction. These skills are aligned with
the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate to include the characteristics of world-class
knowledge, world-class skills, and life and career. Geographic literacy and geographic skills help
students to understand past and current Earth conditions and better plan for the future. Skills used
for geographic inquiry include: map use and construction, model development and other data
visualization, and gathering evidence and communicating findings to better understand the
conditions at and among places. Emphasis is placed on identifying, analyzing, and explaining
spatial distributions and patterns related to the cultural, economic, environmental, political, and
population geographies of contemporary world regions.

The indicators of each standard emphasize geographic skills used by students in each grade level
to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in the scaffolding of
student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

To encourage inquiry, the grade seven Geography of World Regions standards are constructed
around the following four themes:

Places and Regions (PR) – The PR theme encourages the study of the experiences of humans
organized into geographic regions. Regions describe places that are characterized by similar


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 60
physical and human conditions. This theme most closely aligns with Indicator 1 within each
Standard.

Environment and Resources (ER) – The ER theme encourages the study of Earth’s physical
systems (climate, landform, vegetation) and how human activities modify the environment,
bringing both benefits and costs. The distribution of natural resources varies spatially and
temporally, resulting in different political and economic relationships. This theme most closely
aligns with Indicator 2 within each Standard.

Human Systems (HS) – The HS theme encourages the study of various human activities and
characteristics across Earth’s surface. The spatial distribution and movement of populations and
the resultant changes form the basis of understanding. Cultural characteristics, economic
systems, political systems, and settlement patterns are further examples of how human
landscapes vary spatially. This theme most closely aligns with Indicators 3, 4, and 5 within each
Standard.

Applied Geography (AG) – The AG theme encourages the study of how geographic literacy
and geographic skills such as mapping are used to solve problems. An understanding of past and
present spatial organizations of Earth enables people to better understand and plan for the
changes in human and physical phenomena in the future. This theme most closely aligns with
Indicator 6 within each Standard.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 61
                               Grade 7 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                        Expression
M: Mapping- Identify, use,       To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of mapping in the
interpret, and construct         study of geography, students should:
regional-scale maps.                 ● identify and describe the properties and functions of
                                         maps.
                                     ● use a variety of paper and digital technologies to display
                                         and analyze geospatial data.
                                     ● interpret maps for understanding and problem-solving.
                                     ● construct maps using available technology for
                                         understanding and problem-solving.
MR: Models and                   To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of models and
Representations- Identify,       representations in the study of geography, students should:
use, interpret, and construct        ● identify and describe alternative methods of displaying
geographic models and other              geospatial data.
visual representations at the        ● use a variety of models and representations to display and
regional-scale.                          analyze geospatial data.
                                     ● interpret models and representations for understanding
                                         and problem-solving.
                                     ● construct models and representations for understanding
                                         and problem-solving.
GE: Gather Evidence and          To demonstrate their ability to gather evidence and
Communicate Findings-            communicate findings in the study of geography, students
Identify, use, and interpret     should:
different forms of evidence,         ● identify, collect, and analyze geospatial data.
including primary and                ● develop problem statements and hypotheses to explain
secondary sources, at the                observable phenomena.
regional-scale.                      ● evaluate geospatial data and other data sources for
                                         accuracy, quality, perspective, and value.
                                     ● synthesize and communicate findings using verbal,
                                         written, visual, or other appropriate forms.
CC: Conditions,                  To demonstrate their ability to recognize conditions,
Connections, and Regions-        connections, and regions in the study of geography, students
Identify, compare, and           should:
evaluate the development of          ● identify the physical and human conditions of places and
conditions, connections, and             the connections among places.
regions.                             ● compare the physical and human conditions of places and
                                         the connections among places.
                                     ● evaluate the influence of places on other places.
                                     ● evaluate the development of regions as they vary over
                                         time and space.

S: Scale- Identify and           To demonstrate their ability to understand scale in the study of
compare spatial hierarchies.     geography, students should:
                                    ● identify spatial hierarchies from local to global scale.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 62
Indicator                        Expression
                                    ● analyze spatial hierarchies from local to global scale.
DP: Distribution and             To demonstrate their ability to understand distribution and
Patterns- Identify and           patterns in the study of geography, students should:
analyze spatial distributions,      ● identify spatial distributions, patterns, and associations.
patterns, and associations.         ● analyze changes over time in spatial distributions,
                                        patterns, and associations.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 63
                                    Grade 7 Standards
   Continent                                            Standards
                   Standard 1: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
                   and population geographies of contemporary Africa.
                   Enduring Understanding: Africa is a geographically diverse continent with a
                   variety of physical features and social structures. The physical and cultural
                   regional conditions create unique African landscapes, an understanding of which
                   lays the foundation for learning about the continent’s connection to the other
                   peoples and places on Earth.
                   The student will:
                   7.1.1.PR           Identify select African physical systems and human
                                      characteristics of places.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the African continent, such as landforms, water bodies,
                                      countries, and cities.

                   7.1.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions of Africa and the
                                      spatial distributions and patterns of natural resources,
                                      including the impact of their location on human activities.

     Africa                           This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the African
                                      continent and how the locations and characteristics of these
                                      systems influence livelihood choices available to people.

                   7.1.3.HS           Explain Africa’s current human population distributions and
                                      patterns, and use geographic models to compare the conditions
                                      driving migration and demographic change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the
                                      African continent, why they are located where they are, and
                                      how those patterns change over time through economic,
                                      environmental, and politically driven migration.

                   7.1.4.HS           Compare and contrast the dynamic physical and human
                                      conditions that lead to the creation of ethnic, gender, language,
                                      and religious landscapes of African societies.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the African


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 64
   Continent                                          Standards
                                      continent, how they emerge, and how those patterns can
                                      change over time as they diffuse to other locations or contract
                                      and even disappear when confronted by other culture traits.

                   7.1.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political borders using maps,
                                      and explain the connections between African places and other
                                      continents based upon factors such as colonialism,
                                      imperialism, independence movements, and regional alliances.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the African continent by different culture groups
                                      throughout history.

                   7.1.6.AG           Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                      significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                      facing Africa at the local, regional, or global scale.
                   Standard 2: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
                   and population geographies of contemporary Asia.
                   Enduring Understanding: Asia is a geographically diverse continent with a
                   variety of physical features and social structures. The physical and cultural
                   regional conditions create unique Asian landscapes, an understanding of which
                   lays the foundation for learning about the continent’s connection to the other
                   peoples and places on Earth.
                   The student will:
                   7.2.1.PR           Identify select Asian physical systems and human
                                      characteristics of places.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
      Asia                            primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the Asian continent, such as landforms, water bodies,
                                      countries, and cities.

                   7.2.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions of Asia and the spatial
                                      distributions and patterns of natural resources, including the
                                      impact of their location on human activities.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the Asian
                                      continent and how the locations and characteristics of these
                                      systems influence livelihood choices available to people.

                   7.2.3.HS           Explain Asia’s current human population distributions and

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 65
   Continent                                           Standards
                                      patterns, and use geographic models to compare the conditions
                                      driving migration and demographic change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the Asian
                                      continent, why they are located where they are, and how those
                                      patterns change over time through economic, environmental,
                                      and politically driven migration.

                   7.2.4.HS           Compare and contrast the physical and human conditions that
                                      lead to the creation of dynamic ethnic, gender, language, and
                                      religious landscapes of Asian societies.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the Asian
                                      continent, how they emerge, and how those patterns can
                                      change over time as they diffuse to other locations or contract
                                      and even disappear when confronted by other culture traits.

                   7.2.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political borders using maps,
                                      and explain the economic, political, and social connections
                                      between Asian places and other continents.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the Asian continent by different culture groups
                                      throughout history.

                   7.2.6.AG           Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                      significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                      facing Asia at the local, regional, or global scale.
                   Standard 3: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
                   and population geographies of contemporary Australia, Oceania, and Antarctica.
                   Enduring Understanding: Australia and the southern Pacific (including
                   Antarctica) is a geographically diverse area with a variety of physical features
                   and social structures. The physical and cultural regional conditions create unique
  Australia,       landscapes, an understanding of which lays the foundation for learning about the
   Oceania,        area’s connection to the other peoples and places on Earth.
  Antarctica
                   The student will:
                   7.3.1.PR           Identify select Australia, Oceania, and Antarctica physical
                                      systems and human characteristics of places.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 66
   Continent                                            Standards
                                      primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the region being studied such as landforms, water bodies,
                                      countries, and cities.

                   7.3.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions and the spatial
                                      distributions and patterns of natural resources, including the
                                      impact of their location on human activities.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the
                                      Australia, Oceania, and Antarctic region and how the locations
                                      and characteristics of these systems influence livelihood
                                      choices available to people.

                   7.3.3.HS           Explain the current human population distributions and
                                      patterns of Australia, Oceania, and Antarctica, and use
                                      geographic models to compare the conditions driving
                                      migration and demographic change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the
                                      Australia, Oceania, and Antarctic region, why they are located
                                      where they are, and how those patterns change over time
                                      through economic, environmental, and politically driven
                                      migration.

                   7.3.4.HS           Compare and contrast the dynamic physical and human
                                      conditions that lead to the creation of ethnic, gender, language,
                                      and religious landscapes of Australia, Oceania, and Antarctica.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the Australia,
                                      Oceania, and Antarctic region, how they emerge, and how
                                      those patterns can change over time as they diffuse to other
                                      locations or contract and even disappear when confronted by
                                      other culture traits.

                   7.3.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political boarders using maps,
                                      and explain resource relationships between Australia, Oceania,
                                      and Antarctica and other continents.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the Australia, Oceania, and Antarctic region by

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 67
   Continent                                            Standards
                                      different culture groups throughout history.

                   7.3.6.AG           Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                      significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                      facing Australia, Oceania, or Antarctica at the local, regional,
                                      or global scale.
                   Standard 4: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
                   and population geographies of contemporary Europe.
                   Enduring Understanding: Europe is a geographically diverse continent with a
                   variety of physical features and social structures. The physical and cultural
                   regional conditions create unique European landscapes, an understanding of
                   which lays the foundation for learning about the continent’s connection to the
                   other peoples and places on Earth.
                   The student will:
                   7.4.1.PR           Identify select European physical systems and human
                                      characteristics of places.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the European continent, such as landforms, water bodies,
                                      countries, and cities.

                   7.4.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions and the spatial
                                      distributions and patterns of natural resources, including the
    Europe                            impact of their location on human activities.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the
                                      European continent and how the locations and characteristics
                                      of these systems influence livelihood choices available to
                                      people.

                   7.4.3.HS           Explain Europe’s current human population distributions and
                                      patterns, and use geographic models to compare the conditions
                                      driving migration and demographic change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the
                                      European continent, why they are located where they are, and
                                      how those patterns change over time through economic,
                                      environmental, and politically driven migration.

                   7.4.4.HS           Compare and contrast the dynamic physical and human
                                      conditions that lead to the creation of ethnic, gender, language,

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 68
   Continent                                           Standards
                                      and religious landscapes of European societies.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the European
                                      continent, how they emerge, and how those patterns can
                                      change over time as they diffuse to other locations or contract
                                      and even disappear when confronted by other culture traits.

                   7.4.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political borders using maps,
                                      and explain the connections between European countries based
                                      upon centripetal and centrifugal forces, as well as connections
                                      between European places and other continents.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the European continent by different culture groups
                                      throughout history.

                   7.4.6.AG           Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                      significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                      facing Europe at the local, regional, or global scale.
                   Standard 5: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
                   and population geographies of contemporary North America.
                   Enduring Understanding: North America is a geographically diverse continent
                   with a variety of physical features and social structures. The physical and cultural
                   regional conditions create unique North American landscapes, an understanding
                   of which lays the foundation for learning about the continent’s connection to the
                   other peoples and places on Earth.
                   The student will:
                   7.5.1.PR           Identify select North American physical systems and human
                                      characteristics of places.

North America                         This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the North American continent, such as landforms, water
                                      bodies, countries, and cities.

                   7.5.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions and the spatial
                                      distributions and patterns of natural resources, including the
                                      impact of their location on human activities.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the North
                                      American continent and how the locations and characteristics

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 69
   Continent                                           Standards
                                      of these systems influence livelihood choices available to
                                      people.

                   7.5.3.HS           Explain North America’s current human population
                                      distributions and patterns, and use geographic models to
                                      compare the conditions driving migration and demographic
                                      change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the North
                                      American continent, why they are located where they are, and
                                      how those patterns change over time through economic,
                                      environmental, and politically driven migration.

                   7.5.4.HS           Compare and contrast the dynamic physical and human
                                      conditions that lead to the creation of ethnic, gender, language,
                                      and religious landscapes of North American societies.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the North
                                      American continent, how they emerge, and how those patterns
                                      can change over time as they diffuse to other locations or
                                      contract and even disappear when confronted by other culture
                                      traits.

                   7.5.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political borders using maps,
                                      explain the economic, political, and social inequalities present
                                      in North American societies, and explain the connections
                                      between North American places and other continents.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the North American continent by different culture
                                      groups throughout history.

                   7.5.6.AG     Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                facing North America at the local, regional, or global scale.
              Standard 6: Analyze the cultural, economic, environmental, physical, political,
              and population geographies of contemporary South America.
South America Enduring Understanding: South America is a geographical structure. The
              physical and cultural regional conditions create unique South American
              landscapes, an understanding of which lays the foundation for learning about the
              continent’s connection to the other peoples and places on Earth.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 70
   Continent                                           Standards
                   The student will:
                   7.6.1.PR          Identify select South American physical systems (e.g.,
                                     landforms and bodies of water), and human characteristics of
                                     places (e.g., countries and cities).

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      primary physical and human characteristics of places within
                                      the South American continent, such as landforms, water
                                      bodies, countries, and cities.

                   7.6.2.ER           Identify climate and vegetation regions and the spatial
                                      distributions and patterns of natural resources, including the
                                      impact of their location on human activities.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of physical systems within the South
                                      American continent and how the locations and characteristics
                                      of these systems influence livelihood choices available to
                                      people.

                   7.6.3.HS           Explain South America’s current human population
                                      distributions and patterns, and use geographic models to
                                      compare the conditions driving migration and demographic
                                      change.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of human populations within the South
                                      American continent, why they are located where they are, and
                                      how those patterns change over time through economic,
                                      environmental, and politically driven migration.

                   7.6.4.HS           Compare and contrast the dynamic physical and human
                                      conditions that lead to the creation of ethnic, gender, language,
                                      and religious landscapes of South American societies.

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      distribution and pattern of culture traits within the South
                                      American continent, how they emerge, and how those patterns
                                      can change over time as they diffuse to other locations or
                                      contract and even disappear when confronted by other culture
                                      traits.

                   7.6.5.HS           Identify and analyze the current political borders using maps,
                                      explain the economic, political, and social inequalities present

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 71
   Continent                                         Standards
                                      in South American societies, and explain the connections
                                      between South American places and other continents

                                      This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                                      various ways that spaces have been divided and controlled
                                      within the South American continent by different culture
                                      groups throughout history.

                   7.6.6.AG           Gather evidence and construct a map or model to investigate a
                                      significant contemporary cultural, economic, or political issue
                                      facing South America at the local, regional, or global scale.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 72
Grade 8

South Carolina and the United States

Students will study the history of South Carolina, within context of United States history in grade
eight. This study begins with South Carolina’s colonial development and settlement as a British
colony. South Carolinians played pivotal roles throughout the American Revolution and the
Constitutional Convention, which established the foundations for the new nation. Sectional
division came as a result of the growing institution of slavery, interpretations of the role of
government, and expansion of the nation. South Carolina led the secession of Southern states,
culminating in the Civil War. As the nation attempted to heal the wounds of the war,
Reconstruction policies brought about political change while sectional division remained. The
end of the 19th century ushered in industrialization to South Carolina and the nation, providing
new opportunities for many people. Throughout the 20th century, South Carolina emerged as a
national leader for defense production, agriculture, and tourism. As the state grew economically,
social change was also brought on by the Civil Rights Movement. During the turn of the 21st
century, South Carolina continues to attract businesses and people, while continuing to find
solutions to new challenges.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade eight. The
progression of developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten and
builds with each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with the
Profile of the South Carolina Graduate, with a focus on world-class knowledge, world-class
skills, and life and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one represent the skills
utilized by students in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been
deconstructed to aid in the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards are categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content when teaching
chronologically, the ability to teach thematically rather than chronologically, and to support
project- or problem-based learning. These themes also allow students the opportunity to create
change by engaging in civic participation. To encourage inquiry, the grade eight South Carolina
and the United States standards are constructed around the following themes:

Civic Participation – The Civic Participation theme encourages the study of people using the
economic, political, and social processes to create change in South Carolina and the United
States. People utilize these processes in order to serve varied interests at the local, state, and
national levels.

Cultural Interactions – The Cultural Interactions theme encourages the study of how cultural
exchanges have played a pivotal role in the foundation and shaping of society. These interactions
have shaped the mosaic of South Carolina and the United States.

Development of Political Ideas and Institutions – The Development of Political Ideas and
Institutions theme encourages the study of South Carolina’s leading role in establishing founding
principles and documents that serve as the basis for our federal system of government. Citizens


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 73
continue to exercise their natural rights to define the role of government locally, regionally, and
nationally through civic participation.

Economic Decision Making – The Economic Decision Making theme encourages the study of
how people make choices based on and influenced by scarcity and limited resources. From
colonial mercantilism to modern day capitalism, these decisions impact political, geographic, and
social issues at the local, state, and national levels. Through economic and policy decisions,
South Carolinians have increased their role in the national economic landscape.

Geographic Relationships – The Geographic Relationships theme encourages the study of how
geography defined the development of the economic, political, and social landscape in both
South Carolina and the United States.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 74
                              Grade 8 Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                          Expression
CO: Comparison- Utilize            To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
multiple characteristics of        students should:
historical developments to             ● explain characteristics (i.e. who, what, where, why,
create a comparative                       when, and how) of historical developments.
analysis.                              ● categorize similarities and differences among historical
                                           developments.
CE: Causation- Identify and        To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
compare significant turning        students should:
points, including the related          ● identify significant events that led to change or maintain
causes and effects that affect             continuity.
historical continuity and              ● evaluate the causes of turning points and how they lead
change.                                    to change or continuity.
                                       ● evaluate the effects of turning points and how they lead
                                           to change or continuity.
                                       ● compare the importance of turning points related to
                                           causality.
P: Periodization- Utilize          To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
significant turning points to      students should:
justify the historical narrative       ● utilize turning points to identify historical periods
of a time period.                          according to historical themes.
                                       ● explain how significant events and related developments
                                           lead to changes in historical periods.
                                       ● justify the categorization of historical periods through the
                                           use of turning points and related developments.
CX: Context- Explain how           To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
historical themes are used to          ● identify and describe a historical theme.
determine context when                 ● distinguish historical events based on time and place.
analyzing significant events.          ● analyze how historical developments affect the world in
                                           both historic and contemporary contexts.
                                       ● explain how one event can be contextualized within more
                                           than one theme.
                                       ● assess the impact of historical patterns on the conditions
                                           surrounding an event.
CC: Continuities and               To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Analyze                   changes, students should:
significant turning points and         ● define theme-based continuity and change.
theme-based patterns of                ● cite evidence of theme-based continuities and changes
continuities and changes                   within a period of time.
within a period of time.               ● determine the significance of turning points in the
                                           context of theme-based patterns.
E: Evidence- Identify,             To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of
interpret, and utilize different   history, students should:
forms of evidence, including           ● compare various types of sources to be used in a

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 75
Indicator                        Expression
primary and secondary                  historical study.
sources, used in an inquiry-        ● engage in historical thinking skills to collect evidence
based study of history.                from various sources that identifies bias, context, tone,
                                       purpose, and periodization.
                                    ● evaluate secondary sources for accuracy and validity.
                                    ● examine multiple points of view to construct a historical
                                       argument.
                                    ● corroborate multiple sources.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 76
                                    Grade 8 Standards
Key Concepts                                           Standards
                 Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the development of South Carolina
                 during the settlement and colonization of North America in the period of 1500–
                 1756.
                 Enduring Understanding: The Carolina colony was composed of indigenous,
                 immigrant, and enslaved populations. Various factors across North America and the
                 Carolina colony facilitated the eventual emergence of an American national identity.
                 The student will:

                 8.1.CO        Compare the three British North American colonial regions
                               economically, politically, socially, and in regard to labor
                               development.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the three
                               British colonial regions developed in terms of their culture,
                               economies, geography, and labor. The indicator was also developed to
                               encourage inquiry into the unique story of the development of South
                               Carolina.

                 8.1.CE        Analyze the factors that contributed to the development of South
Settlement and                 Carolina’s economic system and the subsequent impacts on different
 Development                   populations within the colony.

                               This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the geographic
                               and human factors that contributed to the development of South
                               Carolina’s economic system. This indicator was also written to
                               encourage inquiry into South Carolina’s distinct social and economic
                               system as influenced by British Barbados.

                 8.1.P         Summarize major events in the development of South Carolina which
                               impacted the economic, political, and social structure of the colony.

                               This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                               development of South Carolina as a result of mercantilist policies,
                               which ranged from the Navigation Acts to trade with Native
                               Americans to the use of enslaved people as labor. This indicator was
                               also designed to promote inquiry into agricultural development, using
                               the rice-growing knowledge of enslaved West Africans.

                 8.1.CX        Contextualize the development of South Carolina’s political
                               institutions during the colonization of British North America.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 77
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                              development of the political structure of the South Carolina colony
                              from the development of Charles Towne under English control to the
                              movement toward self-rule.

               8.1.CC         Analyze the changes and continuities of the Native Americans’
                              experiences prior to and as a result of settlement and colonization.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into Native
                              American civilizations and cultures prior to European contact and
                              their interactions with Europeans during the period of settlement and
                              colonization, including their efforts to preserve their cultures.

               8.1.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to examine
                              multiple perspectives and influences of the economic, political, and
                              social effects of South Carolina’s settlement and colonization on the
                              development of various forms of government across the colonies.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of how South Carolinians and
               Americans created a revolutionary form of government during the period of 1757–
               1815.
               Enduring Understanding: Political and economic developments underscored how
               the colonists in British North America had become uniquely American, prompting
               the development of a new nation. Drawing on their experience under British rule,
               the founding generation created a government with shared powers between the state
               and federal institutions.
               The student will:
               8.2.CO          Compare the motives and demographics of loyalists and patriots
                               within South Carolina and the colonies.
 Revolution
and Identity                  This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the economic,
                              political, and social motivations of the patriots and the loyalists in the
                              era of the American Revolution.

               8.2.CE         Explain the economic, political, and social factors surrounding the
                              American Revolution.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                              colonies began to unify to create a distinctive American identity over
                              the course of events of the American Revolution.
               8.2.P          Analyze significant founding principles that led to the development of
                              federalism in South Carolina and the United States.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 78
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the
                              development of the Constitution, Declaration of Independence, the
                              Articles of Confederation, and representative democracy.

               8.2.CX         Contextualize the roles of various groups of South Carolinians as the
                              colonies moved toward becoming an independent nation.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                              motivations of colonists during the American Revolution and the
                              progression of conflict and failed compromise that ultimately led to
                              revolution.

               8.2.CC         Analyze the continuities and changes of how different groups
                              immigrated to and migrated within South Carolina.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                              immigration and migration patterns of different groups within South
                              Carolina, including their economic, political, and social power to do
                              so. This indicator also promotes inquiry into an exploration of such
                              ideas as the expansion of slavery and hostilities with the native
                              peoples.

               8.2.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze multiple
                              perspectives on the development of democracy in South Carolina and
                              the United States.

              Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of conflict and compromise in South
              Carolina, the Southern region, and the United States as a result of sectionalism
              between the period 1816–1865.
              Enduring Understanding: As the nation expanded, regional differences were
              exacerbated creating sectionalism threatening South Carolina’s identity and
              American unity. South Carolina struggled to maintain its unique culture and
              economy throughout the Reconstruction Era.
              The student will:
 Compromises
 and Conflict 8.3.CO         Compare the debates between South Carolina and the federal
                             government regarding slavery, federalism, and the Constitution.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the debates,
                              heightened by Westward Expansion, over federal and state power
                              concerning slavery, and the government’s role in protecting and
                              securing natural rights.

               8.3.CE         Examine consequences of the major Civil War military strategies.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 79
Key Concepts                                          Standards

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the Civil War
                              focusing on the impacts of military strategies and major turning points
                              on South Carolina and the U.S.

               8.3.P          Analyze the Civil War Amendments (i.e., 13th, 14th, and 15th) as a
                              turning point in the economic, political, and social structures of South
                              Carolina.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the changes
                              that served as a catalyst for Reconstruction. The indicator was also
                              designed to promote inquiry into how these actions affected the
                              economic, political, and social conditions in the South.

               8.3.CX         Evaluate the economic significance of agriculture on South Carolina,
                              the U.S., and the world.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the economic
                              implications of the expansion of the rice and cotton industries. This
                              indicator was also developed to promote inquiry into Westward
                              Expansion, the mutually beneficial impact of cotton on Northern
                              factories and Southern plantations, and the emerging national and
                              international markets.

               8.3.CC         Analyze debates and efforts to recognize the natural rights of
                              marginalized groups during the period of expansion and sectionalism.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the continuities
                              and changes of the experiences of marginalized groups such as
                              African Americans, Native Americans and women, as the U.S.
                              expanded westward and grappled with the development of new states.

               8.3.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze multiple
                              perspectives on the effects of the Civil War within South Carolina and
                              the United States.

               Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of South Carolina’s role in and response
               to the dynamic economic, political, and social developments in the United States and
               around the world during the period 1862–1929.
    At a
 Crossroads Enduring Understanding: Beginning with Reconstruction, South Carolina
            searched for ways to revitalize its economy and determine the social and political
            status of its population. Later in the period, South Carolina both contributed to
            World War I and grappled with economic depression.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 80
Key Concepts                                          Standards
               The student will:
               8.4.CO       Compare perspectives toward reform that emerged during the
                            Progressive Era.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how new state
                              and federal Progressive legislation affected individuals and businesses
                              in South Carolina and the U.S. The indicator was also designed to
                              promote inquiry into the new perspectives that emerged regarding
                              social and political change.

               8.4.CE         Explain the causes and effects of World War I on South Carolina and
                              the United States.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the significant
                              causes of World War I and the factors leading to U.S. involvement.
                              This indicator was also developed to promote inquiry into the effects
                              of the war, to include its impact on the homefront, migration patterns,
                              and continued foreign policy debates.

               8.4.P          Summarize the economic changes that emerged in South Carolina and
                              the U.S.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into South
                              Carolina’s changing agriculture, industry labor force, and political
                              alignments. This indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into
                              the relationship between South Carolina’s economy and global
                              events, to include imperialism and World War I.

               8.4.CX         Evaluate South Carolinians’ struggle to create an understanding of
                              their post-Civil War position within the state, the country, and the
                              world.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                              former planter class, African Americans, women, and others adjusted
                              to, gained, lost, and/or regained position and status during
                              Reconstruction. This indicator was also written to foster inquiry into
                              how South Carolina worked with a stronger federal government and
                              expanding international markets.

               8.4.CC         Analyze continuities and change in the African American experience
                              in the period of Reconstruction and Jim Crow eras within South
                              Carolina.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the successes

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 81
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                              and failures of Reconstruction, beginning with the Port Royal
                              Experiment, in South Carolina. This indicator was written to explore
                              development of the Constitutions of 1868 and 1895 and to analyze the
                              evolution of restrictions for African Americans from the Black Codes
                              in 1866 through the Plessy decision in 1898.

               8.4.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze multiple
                              perspectives of the challenges and changes within South Carolina and
                              the nation that allowed the U.S. to emerge as a global power during
                              the time period 1862–1929.

               Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the impact of world events on South
               Carolina and the United States from 1929 to present.
               Enduring Understanding: As a result of new perspectives on national security
               following World War I, South Carolina continues to benefit from and contribute to
               national and global communities. Additionally, civic participation and social change
               altered South Carolina’s social standing and political alignment.
               The student will:
               8.5.CO         Compare South Carolina and U.S. wartime contributions and
                              demobilization after World War II.

                              This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into military and
                              economic policies during World War II, to include the significance of
                              military bases in South Carolina. This indicator was also developed to
                              foster inquiry into postwar economic developments and demographic
                              changes, to include the immigration of Jewish refugees following the
                              Holocaust.
  Progress
               8.5.CE         Analyze the factors contributing to the shifts in the political party
                              platforms between 1946–1972.

                              This indicator was designed to foster inquiry into the changes in
                              South Carolina’s political party platforms resulting from the Civil
                              Rights Movement, from Elmore v. Rice to the national Democratic
                              Party’s support of civil rights to Nixon’s Southern Strategy. This
                              indicator also supports inquiry into the effect on South Carolina’s
                              political party platforms resulting from the emergence of the national
                              Republican Party’s positions on foreign policy, limited government,
                              and free trade policies.

               8.5.P          Analyze the transformation of South Carolina’s economy from the
                              Great Depression to its current economic diversification.

                              This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into the devastation of

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 82
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                              the Great Depression and the impact of the New Deal on a largely
                              agricultural South Carolina. This indicator was also designed to foster
                              inquiry into the economic diversification between World War II and
                              the present, to include tourism, global trade and industry, and the
                              maintenance of military bases.

               8.5.CX         Analyze the correlation between the Modern Civil Rights Movement
                              in South Carolina and the U.S.

                              This indicator was designed to foster inquiry into the role of South
                              Carolina in the Modern Civil Rights Movement, to include the
                              influence of court cases such as Briggs v. Elliot and Flemming v.
                              South Carolina Electric and Gas. This indicator was also developed to
                              promote inquiry into the relationship between national leadership,
                              protests, and events and South Carolina leadership, protests and
                              events, such as the Friendship Nine and the Orangeburg Massacre.

               8.5.CC         Analyze the continuities and changes in South Carolina’s identity
                              resulting from the civic participation of different individuals and
                              groups of South Carolinians.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into civic
                              engagement, such as military service, public demonstrations, and
                              political activism, to shape the identity of modern South Carolina.
                              This indicator was also written to encourage inquiry into South
                              Carolinians’ use of the court system and legislation to affect South
                              Carolina’s post-World War II identity.

               8.5.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze multiple
                              perspectives on the cultural changes in South Carolina and the U.S.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 83
Human Geography

Students study Earth’s human geography beginning with the use of maps and other geographic
representations, geospatial technologies, and spatial thinking to understand and communicate
geographic information. Students will examine patterns and processes of how human
characteristics and activities vary across Earth’s surface and how humans understand, use, and
alter the surface of Earth. Conceptual in nature rather than place specific, this course is organized
systematically around the topics of population and migration geography, economic geography,
cultural geography, political geography, and urban geography. Students will also learn to employ
spatial concepts and landscape analysis to examine human patterns and processes and their
environmental consequences.

Instruction should utilize geographic thinking skills and themes developed for grade nine. The
progression of developmentally appropriate geographic thinking skills begins in kindergarten and
builds with each year of social studies instruction with a specific geographic focus in grades
three and seven. These skills are aligned with the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of
world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life and career characteristics. Geographic
literacy and skills help students to understand past and current Earth conditions and better plan
for the future. Skills used for geographic inquiry include: map use, map construction, and
examining geographic data to identify patterns to analyze the changing interconnections between
people and places. These skills allow for connections to be made between content when teaching
systematically, rather than regionally, and to support project- or problem-based learning.

The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by students in each grade level to
further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in the scaffolding of
student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

To encourage inquiry, the grade nine Human Geography standards are constructed around the
following four themes:

Places and Regions (PR) – The PR theme encourages the study of the experiences of humans
organized into geographic regions. Regions describe places that are characterized by similar
physical and human conditions.

Environment and Resources (ER) – The ER theme encourages the study of Earth’s physical
systems (e.g., climate, landform, vegetation) and how human activities modify the environment,
bringing both benefits and costs. The distribution of natural resources varies spatially and
temporally, resulting in different political and economic relationships.

Human Systems (HS) – The HS theme encourages the study of various human activities and
characteristics across Earth’s surface. The spatial distribution and movement of populations and
the resultant changes form the basis of understanding. Cultural characteristics, economic
systems, political systems, and settlement patterns are further examples of how human
landscapes vary spatially.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 84
Applied Geography (AG) – The AG theme encourages the study of how geographic literacy
and geographic skills, such as mapping, are used to solve problems. An understanding of past
and present spatial organizations of Earth enables people to better understand and plan for the
changes in human and physical phenomena in the future.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 85
                    Human Geography Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                        Expression
M: Mapping- Identify, use,       To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of mapping in the
interpret, and construct local   study of geography, students should:
through global scale maps.           ● identify and describe the properties and functions of
                                         maps.
                                     ● use a variety of paper and digital technologies to display
                                         and analyze geospatial data.
                                     ● interpret maps for understanding and problem-solving.
                                     ● construct maps using available technology for
                                         understanding and problem-solving.
MR: Models and                   To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of models and
Representation- Identify,        representation in the study of geography, students should:
use, interpret, and construct        ● identify and describe alternative methods of displaying
geographic models and other              geospatial data.
visual representations from          ● use a variety of models and representations to display and
local to global scales.                  analyze geospatial data.
                                     ● interpret models and representations for understanding
                                         and problem-solving.
                                     ● construct models and representations for understanding
                                         and problem-solving.
GE: Gather Evidence and          To demonstrate their ability to gather evidence and
Communicate Findings-            communicate findings in the study of geography, students
Identify, use, and interpret     should:
different forms of evidence,         ● identify, collect, and analyze geospatial data.
including primary and                ● develop problem statements and hypotheses to explain
secondary sources, from                  observable phenomena.
local to global scales.              ● evaluate geospatial data and other data sources for
                                         accuracy, perspective, quality, and value.
                                     ● synthesize and communicate findings using verbal,
                                         written, visual, or other appropriate forms.
CC: Conditions,                  To demonstrate their ability to recognize conditions,
Connections, and Regions-        connections, and regions in the study of geography, students
Identify, compare, and           should:
evaluate the development of          ● identify the physical and human conditions of places and
complex conditions,                      the connections between places.
connections, and regions.            ● compare the physical and human conditions of places and
                                         the connections among places.
                                     ● evaluate the influence of places on other places.
                                     ● evaluate the development of regions as they vary over
                                         time and space.
                                     ● construct regions based on similar physical and human
                                         conditions.
S: Scale- Identify, compare,     To demonstrate their ability to understand scale in the study of
and interpret spatial            geography, students should:

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 86
Indicator                        Expression
hierarchies.                        ● identify spatial hierarchies from local to global scale.
                                    ● analyze spatial hierarchies from local to global scale.
                                    ● evaluate outcomes as they vary by scale.
DP: Distribution and             To demonstrate their ability to understand distribution and
Patterns- Identify, analyze,     patterns in the study of geography, students should:
and explain spatial                 ● identify spatial distributions, patterns, and associations.
distributions, patterns, and        ● analyze changes over time in spatial distributions,
associations.                           patterns, and associations.
                                    ● explain changes over time in extent for spatial
                                        phenomena.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 87
                            Human Geography Standards
Key Concepts                                        Standards
               Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the characteristics, distribution, and
               migration of human populations on Earth’s surface.
               Enduring Understanding: Human populations and migration patterns vary across
               Earth’s surface and change through time. The interaction between human and
               environmental conditions helps to explain the characteristics, spatial distributions,
               and movements of human populations.
               The student will:
               HG.1.1.HS       Identify and analyze the spatial distributions and patterns of human
                               population using maps and geographic models and representations.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into population
                                distribution at different scales. This indicator also promotes inquiry
                                into how population data is analyzed, created, and presented.

               HG.1.2. PR       Explain the cultural, economic, environmental, and political
                                conditions and connections that contribute to human migration
                                patterns.

                                This indicator was designed to promote inquiry to understand the
 Population                     various push and pull factors that contribute to migration patterns at
    and                         different scales. Case studies could create inquiry into patterns from
 Migration                      rural to urban movements within countries, major and minor
                                international movements, and both historical and contemporary
                                examples. This indicator also promotes inquiry into describing
                                different types of migration, including international and internal,
                                involuntary (i.e., forced) and voluntary.

               HG.1.3.HS        Analyze historical population and migration maps and models
                                through time to predict future trends and patterns.

                                This indicator is designed to promote inquiry into changes in fertility
                                and mortality as observed through study of the Demographic
                                Transition Model as it applies to different countries and regions. The
                                Migration Transition Model also provides a framework to explore
                                historical migration patterns and predict future ones.

               HG.1.4.HS        Analyze and evaluate population and migration issues and policies
                                from the local to the global scale using geographic models and
                                representations.

                                This indicator is designed to promote inquiry into the issues


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 88
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                                stemming from both aging and declining populations and policies
                                that attempt to control population growth and decline. This indicator
                                also promotes inquiry into large-scale voluntary migration patterns,
                                and exploration of the economic, environmental, political, and
                                social, conditions that then may lead to policies governing migration
                                and pathways to citizenship, including quotas and guest worker
                                systems.

               HG.1.5.HS        Evaluate the cultural, economic, environmental, and political
                                impacts of human migration on human settlements in various
                                regions.

                                This indicator is designed to promote inquiry into a broad range of
                                impacts, both positive and negative, that human migration has on
                                places that generate migrants, as well as those that receive migrants.
                                This indicator is also designed to promote inquiry into how these
                                impacts result from different types of migration including internal,
                                international, involuntary, and voluntary, as well as how these
                                impacts vary from place to place and at different scales.

               HG.1.6.AG        Gather evidence of human population and migration, construct a
                                map to explain current or future development issues at different
                                scales, and communicate findings.

            Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the conditions, interconnections, and
            levels of economic development across Earth’s surface.
            Enduring Understanding: Varying degrees of economic development exist across
            Earth and help to define and differentiate regions of the world. Communication,
            economic, and transportation systems are spatially organized and global
            interdependence results through continuous change and increasing interconnections.
            The student will:
            HG.2.1.PR       Identify regions of varying degrees of economic development, and
 Economic                   explain the factors that influence the location and spatial distribution
Development                 of these regions at the local and global scales using maps and
                            geographic models and representations.

                                This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the spatial
                                distribution and measurement of development levels across the
                                Earth.

               HG.2.2.HS        Compare and evaluate different measures of development, and
                                analyze patterns and trends in various regions of economic
                                development.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 89
Key Concepts                                          Standards

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how a state
                                measures development by analyzing economic, social, and
                                demographic factors. This indicator also promotes inquiry into
                                development trends. Equally important is inquiry into gender
                                disparities.

               HG.2.3.HS        Identify and analyze the spatial distributions and patterns of primary,
                                secondary, and tertiary sectors and activities of production and
                                consumption using maps and geographic models and representations.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how different
                                economic activities operate, how labor force involvement in each
                                sector can help indicate development levels, and how the three
                                economic sectors and activities of production and consumption are
                                distributed at various scales. This indicator also promotes inquiry
                                into changing gender roles throughout all sectors of the economy.

               HG.2.4.PR        Explain the conditions and connections that contribute to global
                                interdependence of communications, economic, and transportation
                                systems.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the location-
                                specific advantages in economics, communication, and
                                transportation, and how these have changed over time. This indicator
                                also promotes inquiry into the costs and barriers of economic
                                development.

               HG.2.5.ER        Analyze the distribution and patterns of energy production and
                                consumption over time, and evaluate the impacts and sustainability
                                of different energy sources at varying scales.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                distribution of patterns that illustrate energy production and
                                consumption by countries at different levels of development and
                                over time. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how the
                                development of alternative energy sources impact places of
                                production and consumption over time.

               HG.2.6.AG        Gather evidence of economic development, construct a map to
                                explain current or future development issues at different scales, and
                                communicate findings.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 90
Key Concepts                                           Standards
               Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the characteristics of culture and
               cultural patterns and processes across Earth’s surface.
               Enduring Understanding: There are many regional variations of culture and
               cultural patterns and processes which lead to varying levels of cultural isolation and
               interaction. Ethnic, linguistic, and religious cultural characteristics create unique
               cultural landscapes across Earth’s surface.
               The student will:
               HG.3.1.HS        Identify the characteristics of popular and folk culture, and explain
                                the factors that influence the location and spatial distribution of these
                                types of culture at the local and global scales using maps and
                                geographic models and representations.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how popular
                                and folk cultures are characteristically different and how they vary
                                from place to and from time to time. This indicator also promotes
                                inquiry into how factors influence the location and spatial
                                distribution of these types of cultures.

               HG.3.2.HS        Identify and analyze the spatial distribution, patterns, and diffusion
                                of ethnic, linguistic, and religious cultural characteristics using maps
  Cultural                      and other geographic representations.
Patterns and
 Processes                      This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into cultural
                                characteristics and patterns in different regions and at different scales
                                across the world. This indicator also promotes inquiry into the
                                processes driving cultural diffusion and how it impacts places at
                                different scales.

               HG.3.3.PR        Analyze and explain the conditions and connections that create
                                ethnic, linguistic, and religious patterns at varying scales.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how cultural
                                characteristics are determined by a broad range of factors and
                                interactions specific to a place.

               HG.3.4.HS        Investigate and evaluate the cultural conditions in different regions
                                that play a role in cooperation and conflict over time.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                increasing interdependence has brought different cultural groups
                                greater contact with each other and the ways in which this contact
                                shapes interactions.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 91
Key Concepts                                        Standards
               HG.3.5.PR        Compare and contrast cultural landscapes in various regions, and
                                analyze the human imprint on different landscapes.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how popular
                                and traditional culture shaped landscapes differently. This indicator
                                also promotes inquiry into the ways in which cultural landscapes can
                                be interpreted.

               HG.3.6.AG        Gather evidence of cultural patterns and processes, construct a map
                                to explain current or future development issues at different scales,
                                and communicate findings.

               Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of how cooperation and conflict among
               people influence the division and control of Earth’s surface.
               Enduring Understanding: Earth is globally interdependent, yet locally controlled.
               Through forces of globalization and regional variations, Earth’s territorial divisions
               are capable of cooperation or conflict that result in continual change of the modern
               state system.
               The student will:
               HG.4.1HS        Identify and analyze patterns of territoriality and the relationships of
                               power and spatial organization at various scales using maps and
                               other geographic representations.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how space is
                                politically organized and controlled. This indicator also promotes
                                inquiry into how countries spatially extend their power over other
  Political                     regions outside of their sovereignty.
Organization
  of Space
               HG.4.2.PR        Explain the conditions and connections that contribute to the creation
                                of boundaries and states, and analyze how Earth’s surface is
                                organized on a contemporary political map.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the different
                                types of boundaries that exist between countries and how these
                                boundaries are created and administered. This indicator also
                                promotes inquiry into how the contemporary political map is
                                organized and how it has changed over time.

               HG.4.3.PR        Analyze and evaluate the conditions and connections that have
                                contributed to the development of the modern state system and the
                                rise of supranationalism in various regions.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 92
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                                modern state (i.e., country) system developed. This indicator also
                                encourages inquiry into how ideas of autonomy, sovereignty, and
                                self-determination can affect geopolitical developments.

               HG.4.4.PR        Analyze how states spatially organize governance systems, and
                                explain the distribution and patterns of these political systems in
                                various regions.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the range of
                                ways that countries spatially organize their governments. This
                                indicator also encourage inquiry into how the United States has
                                organized its federal system to provide for democratic
                                representation.

               HG.4.5.HS        Explain how forces of globalization and regional variations in
                                resources can create opportunities for change, conflict, and
                                cooperation for the control of Earth’s surface.

                                This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how
                                globalization and resource competition results in changes to the
                                political map. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how
                                globalization can create both cooperation and conflict.

               HG.4.6.AG        Gather evidence on boundary issues at different scales, construct a
                                map to explain changes in control over people, land, or resources,
                                and communicate findings.

           Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the distribution, function, patterns,
           and processes of human settlement across Earth’s surface.
           Enduring Understanding: Human settlements, both urban and rural, vary
           according to their distribution, function, and patterns. Human settlements and the
           processes of urban development result in continual change of the urban landscape.
           The student will:
           HG.5.1.PR       Identify and explain the conditions and connections that influence
Urban Land                 the characteristics, forms, and functions of cities and their spatial
   Use                     distribution.

                                This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into the location of
                                cities, including a city’s site and its situation relative to other places.
                                This indicator also prompts inquiry into geographic factors that
                                define a city’s built characteristics and its functions, as well as its
                                connections to other cities.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 93
Key Concepts                                          Standards
               HG.5.2.PR        Analyze and compare the arrangement of land used in human
                                settlements in different regions using maps, models, and
                                representations.

                                This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into how the spatial
                                distribution of cities can be explored through geographic models and
                                a broad range of visual representations. This indicator also promotes
                                inquiry into how the internal structure of cities, such as its
                                transportation systems and particular land uses, has changed over
                                time.

               HG.5.3.ER        Identify and evaluate how the conditions and connections of
                                settlements in various regions can create economic, environmental,
                                political, social, and sustainability challenges at various scales.

                                This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into the challenges
                                faced by settlements in both urban and rural areas such as
                                employment opportunities, effective governance, and appropriate
                                infrastructure. This indicator also promotes inquiry into
                                sustainability challenges cities face related to energy use, resource
                                availability, and waste/pollution.

               HG.5.4.HS        Explain and analyze how distribution and patterns of urban size and
                                hierarchy shapes the design, planning, and structure of other human
                                settlements.

                                This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into how city size
                                relates to the opportunities, goods, and services available there, and
                                how those same features impact similar offerings in cities larger and
                                smaller. This indicator also promotes inquiry into the ways in which
                                geographic models can be used to analyze the structure, design, and
                                planning of settlements.

               HG.5.5.PR        Analyze and evaluate the connections between rural and urban
                                regions and their impact on globalization at different scales.

                                This indicator was designed to promote inquiry into how core and
                                periphery regions differ in urban population and how these
                                differences create distinct land use and cultural patterns. This
                                indicator was also designed to promote inquiry into the specific
                                relationship between urban and rural areas concerning food
                                production and consumption.

               HG.5.6.AG        Gather evidence on human settlements, construct a map to explain

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 94
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                                processes, patterns and functions in various regions, and
                                communicate findings.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 95
Modern World History

Students will study the history of the Modern World in grade ten, beginning with the time period
of 1300 to present. Students will begin by learning about the emergence of the Modern World
from 1300–1500, global affairs and interactions (1450– 1815), the rise of the new governments
and competition in the global community (1815–1918), the emergence of new world powers
(1885–1950), and the world from World War II to present day (1933–present). Students will
learn all Modern World History through the lens of inquiry in order to study the world that trade
created, which led to the influence of interactions of various changes to culture, governments,
ideas, innovation, people, religion, and revolution with an intent to create a citizen who has a
global perspective.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade 10. The
progression of the developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten
and builds with each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with
the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life
and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by students
in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in
the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content when teaching
chronologically, the ability to teach thematically rather than chronologically, and to support
project- or problem-based learning. To encourage inquiry, the grade 10 Modern World History
standards are constructed around the following six themes:

Cultural Development and Interaction – The Cultural Development and Interaction theme
encourages the study of the development of individual and collective cultures from multiple
viewpoints. This includes effects on the various economic, political, and social systems over
time, as well as the role cultures play within the world. Various religions, belief systems,
philosophies, and cultural and artistic expressions are explored in order to understand how
cultures are unique yet similar to one another.

Economic Systems and Interaction – The Economic Systems and Interaction theme encourages
the study of human societies and the development of various economic systems including the
production and distribution of goods and services, the development of trade and commerce
between various societies and the world, and the causes and effects of economic growth and
decline. Distribution of resources, innovations, and government policy drive the development,
strength, and sustainability of societies over time and in movements such as colonialism,
exploration, imperialism, and industrialization.

Foundations of Government and State Building – The Foundations of Government and State
Building theme encourages the study of different state forms, such as dynasties, empires, and
nation-states, while focusing on the growth of and the interactions among them. The various
types of political systems, founding and important documents, as well as corresponding



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 96
ideological foundations will be explored. In addition, the development, governing systems, and
sustainability of governments are included in this theme.

Global Citizenship – The Global Citizenship theme encourages the study of the roles and
responsibilities of being an active member in a global society. Responsible global citizens
understand global issues, understand perspectives of global interconnectedness, and advocate for
cultural understanding to create international cooperation.

Human Experience – The Human Experience theme encourages the study of human and
physical geography including a study of the human condition and its interaction with the world.
This theme examines how societies develop over time using interactions between humans and
geography to create different cultures and governments. The basis of this theme includes: belief
systems, gender, hierarchies, migration, and specialization of labor.

Innovation, Revolution, and Change – The Innovation, Revolution, and Change theme
encourages the study of major turning points in world history and their impact on societies and
governments throughout the world. Global societies have been shaped by conflicts among
nations, emerging advancements, ideas, and the technological rise of new global powers.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 97
                  Modern World History Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                          Expression
CO: Comparison- Utilize            To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
similarities and differences       students should:
among historical                       ● identify the characteristics of historical events over time,
developments over time,                   place, and culture.
place, and culture to create a         ● categorize historical events according to similarities and
comparative analysis.                     differences.
                                       ● construct conclusions about historical events.
CE: Causation- Analyze             To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
and compare significant            students should:
events, including the related          ● recognize the elements of continuity and change.
causes and effects that affect         ● identify significant events in history.
historical continuity and              ● understand the implications of cause and effect in
change.                                   relation to continuity and change.
                                       ● explore the relationship of cause and effect in creating
                                          significant events in history.
                                       ● compare the significance of turning points related to
                                          causality.
P: Periodization-                  To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
Summarize and analyze              students should:
methods historians use to              ● define and understand the characteristics of an era.
categorize historical                  ● describe the methods by which historians categorize
developments and major                    turning point into eras.
turning points in order to             ● summarize major turning points and developments
create historical                         according to historical eras and themes.
periodization.
CX: Context- Analyze how           To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
historical events produce              ● distinguish events based on time and place.
themes that create context by          ● identify patterns between various developments over
which we understand                        time.
historical developments.               ● connect the relationship between identified historical
                                           themes and developments.
CC: Continuities and               To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Examine                   changes, students should:
significant turning points and         ● define continuity and change.
theme-based patterns of                ● identify patterns of continuity and change.
continuities and changes               ● cite evidence of continuities and catalysts for changes
within a period, including                 within a period.
catalysts for those changes.           ● construct an argument that supports a catalyst of change
                                           for a significant event.
E: Evidence- Identify,             To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of
interpret, and utilize different   history, students should:
forms of evidence, including           ● use historical thinking skills to weigh primary sources
primary and secondary                      and identify point of view, including the effect of the

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 98
Indicator                        Expression
sources, used in an inquiry-           author’s position, group affiliation, or specific beliefs.
based study of history.             ● discern similarities and differences among multiple
                                       points of view.
                                    ● organize multiple points of view to construct a historical
                                       argument.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 99
                         Modern World History Standards
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
               Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the emergence of the modern world
               during the period of 1300–1500.
               Enduring Understanding: The emergence of the modern world was a result of
               exploration, the development of international trade networks, and regional
               economic, political, and social systems. These new ideas and understandings of the
               world led to innovation and change.
               The student will:
               MWH.1.CO Compare and contrast the major political, social, and belief systems
                                and their spatial distribution in the early modern world.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the mosaic
                                of the modern world between 1300 and 1500 focusing on the
                                foundational understanding of Buddhism, Christianity,
                                Confucianism, Daoism, Hinduism, Islam, and Judaism as well as
                                highlight the development of early kingdoms, empires, and nation
                                states.

               MWH.1.CE         Examine the causes and effects of the events surrounding the
 Emergence                      Renaissance on the rise of Europe.
   of the
  Modern                        This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes
  World                         and effects of the Black Death, the influence of the Catholic
                                Church, and the Renaissance during the time period, and their
                                implications on the development of the modern world.

               MWH.1.P          Summarize the motivations of worldwide exploration and the
                                influence of exploration on world civilizations.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                interactions between the European countries, pre-Columbian
                                societies, the world-wide enslavement of native peoples, as well as
                                individual Asian societies focusing on trade, exploration, and the
                                emergence of an imperial world.

               MWH.1.CX         Contextualize the Indian Ocean as the center of global exchanges
                                within the historically significant Eastern Hemisphere trade
                                networks.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                                emergence of the Indian Ocean trade route, the Silk Road, and the
                                power shifts between different groups happened as a result of


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 100
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
                                economies, politics, population, resources, and technology.

               MWH.1.CC         Analyze continuities and changes within the rise and expansion of
                                the Ottoman Empire and its implications on the world.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the changes
                                that are facilitated through shifts in economic systems, the strength
                                of government, access to technology, and the strength of leaders in
                                the Ottoman Empire. Further inquiry into the continuities and
                                changes of the emergence, expansion, and significance of the
                                Ottoman Empire, pre-Columbian societies, Asian societies, and
                                Africa in the world during the period is also encouraged.

               MWH.1.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                multiple perspectives of global exchanges.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the effects of commerce, innovation
               and expansion on global affairs and interactions during the period of 1450–1815.
               Enduring Understanding: Global events are characterized by interaction within
               and between societies. Types of economic factors, expansion, government, and
               innovation sought to define and differentiate regions of the world.
               The student will:
               MWH.2.CO Compare and contrast the philosophies and practices of absolutism
                              to the philosophies and practices of constitutional democracies.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into political
                                philosophies including monarchies, constitutional governments,
 Commerce,                      autocracies, and democracies, and their impact on global affairs
 Innovation,                    during the age of commerce, expansion, and innovation.
    and
  Expansion MWH.2.CE            Summarize how major world revolutions created new global affairs
                                and interactions.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes
                                of the new American democratic political institutions of the 18th
                                century and their subsequent impact on the various political
                                revolutions and institutions throughout the western hemisphere
                                during the 19th century.

               MWH.2.P          Analyze significant developments resulting from colonists in the
                                Western Hemisphere applying the principles of the Enlightenment
                                in the creation of the new political institutions during the period

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 101
Key Concepts
                                                         Standards
                                    1765–1815.

                                    This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                    European Enlightenment, and how the ideas of the Enlightenment
                                    led to the British, American, French, Haitian, and Latin American
                                    Revolutions.
                    MWH.2.CX        Contextualize the impact of the Scientific Revolution and
                                    Enlightenment in expanding global interactions in commerce and
                                    innovations.

                                    This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                    revolutionary events, scientific and political innovators, and the
                                    philosophies surrounding the Scientific Revolution, the
                                    Enlightenment, and the Protestant Reformation in Europe.

                    MWH.2.CC        Examine the continuities and changes in the development of world
                                    trade networks and colonialism.

                                    This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into Atlantic
                                    exploration, colonialism, trade networks among African kingdoms
                                    and the increasing interaction between Asian countries due to trade.

                    MWH.2.E         Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                    multiple perspectives on global interactions.

                    Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of how the development of nationalism
                    and industrialization affected the rise of new governments and competition in the
                    global economy from 1815–1918.
                    Enduring Understanding: The rise and spread of imperialism and nationalism
                    affected the landscape of and interactions between international entities during the
                    19th century. Factors such as cultural change, industrialism, nationalism, and
                    revolution led to a worldwide shift which ultimately resulted in world war.
                    The student will:
Nationalism and
Industrialization   MWH.3.CO Compare the significant turning points in the development of
                                     nationalism and their implications on the world.

                                    This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into imperialism,
                                    World War I and the development of nationalism on the world.

                    MWH.3.CE        Analyze industrialization as a catalyst for new immigration and
                                    migration patterns.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 102
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes
                                and effects of immigration and forced migration throughout the
                                world.

               MWH.3.P          Summarize the installation of new governments during the Meiji
                                Restoration, Russian Revolution, and Chinese Revolution.

                                This indicator is intended to encourage inquiry into revolution and
                                the challenges faced by the Chinese, Russian, and Meiji following
                                the adoption of new government systems.

               MWH.3.CX         Contextualize industrialization within the various cultural and
                                political changes occurring during the 19th century.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                industrialization in Great Britain, the United States, and Germany
                                between the Napoleonic Wars and World War I gave context for
                                changes that occurred during the period.

               MWH.3.CC         Analyze continuities and changes in the quality of life in Europe
                                resulting from industrialization.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                continuities and changes in the quality of life of various industrial
                                countries, including changes caused by technology, the creation of
                                new sports and leisure activities, and urbanization and work-life.

               MWH.3.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                multiple perspectives related to the development of nationalism and
                                industrialization.

               Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of how international competition and
               conflict realigned global powers during the time period of 1885–1950.
               Enduring Understanding: Emerging global power led to an era of worldwide
               competition, innovation, and struggle. A shift in economics, power, and technology
   World       contributed to global warfare ushering in a landscape marked by political change.
   Power       The student will:
  Struggle     MWH.4.CO Explain the motives for and effects of European countries in the
                                Age of Imperialism.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the demand
                                for natural resources in order to fuel industrialization, the rise of

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 103
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
                                nationalism, and the increasing economic and political competition
                                between countries. The indicator was also developed to promote
                                inquiry into how countries competed for lands to imperialize in
                                order to fulfill their economic needs.

               MWH.4.CE         Analyze the significant causes of World War I and how the Treaty
                                of Versailles attempted to resolve future global conflicts.

                                This indicator is intended to encourage inquiry into the significant
                                causes of World War I and the impacts of the Treaty of Versailles,
                                including its failure to prevent future global conflicts.

               MWH.4.P          Summarize the significant technological innovations that led to the
                                realignment of global powers.

                                This indicator is intended to encourage inquiry into how the
                                development of industrialization and wartime technologies led to
                                the realignment of global powers.

               MWH.4.CX         Contextualize World War II and the Holocaust within local and
                                global economic, political, and social developments from 1919–
                                1950.

                                This indicator is intended to encourage inquiry into the relationship
                                between World War II and interwar foreign policies, global
                                business cycles, the rise of totalitarian regimes, and postwar
                                alliances. This indicator was also developed to promote inquiry into
                                the relationship between the Holocaust as state-sponsored
                                systematic persecution and interwar totalitarianism, nationalism,
                                economic turmoil, and World War II.

               MWH.4.CC         Analyze significant political and economic developments as
                                catalysts for changing the global power structures.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how new
                                political ideas, events, leaders, and movements set the stage for a
                                shift in power structures after World War II.

               MWH.4.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                multiple perspectives during the Age of Imperialism and among
                                countries in world conflicts.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 104
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
               Standard 5: Demonstrate an understanding of the Modern Age from 1933 to
               present day.
               Enduring Understanding: The Modern World is a mosaic that combines
               economics, geography, politics, religion, and social aspects. The interconnectedness
               of world communities allowed for diverging political ideologies and led individual
               countries to grapple with questions of personal liberty and political rights.
               The student will:
               MWH.5.CO Compare the cultural, economic, and political implications of the
                                Cold War.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the roots of
                                democratic and communist ideals and how their influence spread
                                through the modern world after the end of World War II.

               MWH.5.CE         Analyze significant developments resulting from post-war
                                decolonization in Asia and Africa in the creation of the new
                                countries during the period 1945–1975.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                                effects of decolonization and the subsequent rebuilding of the once
                                colonized world changed the landscape of economic, geographic,
                                political, and social affairs.

               MWH.5.P          Summarize the interconnections between the United States and the
                                world community through major cultural, economic, and political
 Integration                    changes.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how various
                                international organizations were created and impacted the world
                                through their work and the interconnectedness between the fall of
                                communism, the emergence of democracies, and the new threats to
                                security from rogue groups.

               MWH.5.CX         Examine the Holocaust and its aftermath in providing the context
                                for subsequent developments in international efforts to recognize
                                and protect human rights.

                                This indicator was intended to encourage inquiry into the human
                                experience by examining the nature of oppression, civil war, and
                                genocide. This indicator also supports inquiry into the struggle for
                                civil rights and international efforts to protect human rights in the
                                modern world.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 105
Key Concepts
                                                      Standards
               MWH.5.CC         Contextualize the major economic, geographical, political,
                                religious, and social factors and their impact on nations during the
                                period 1989–present.

                                This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry through three
                                separate lenses: the core countries lens, the semi-periphery
                                countries lens, and the periphery countries lens. This allows for the
                                discovery of how major economic, geographic, political, religious,
                                and social factors come together to create the modern world.

               MWH.5.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                multiple perspectives of international events.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 106
United States History and the Constitution

In the United States History and the Constitution course, students will employ the skills of a
historian to explore the foundation of the American Republic and the expansion and disunion of
the United States. Students will investigate the impact of American industrialism and capitalism,
including being drawn into world wars, on American politics and geopolitics. Through the lens
of the Cold War, students will study the contemporary era including the age of technological
development, increased civic participation, and political party realignment.

Instruction should utilize the historical thinking skills and themes developed for grade 11. The
progression of developmentally appropriate historical thinking skills begins in kindergarten and
builds with each year of history instruction. These historical thinking skills are aligned with the
Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class knowledge, world-class skills, and life
and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one represent the skills utilized by students
in each grade level to further explore the content. These skills have been deconstructed to aid in
the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content when teaching
chronologically, the ability to teach thematically rather than chronologically, and to support
project or problem based learning. These themes also allow students the opportunity to create
change by engaging in civic participation. To encourage inquiry, the grade 11 United States
History and the Constitution standards are constructed around the following six themes:

American Culture and Identity – The American Culture and Identity theme encourages the
study of various cultural groups, movements, and the development of distinct ideologies,
including American exceptionalism, throughout periods of American history. Additionally,
cultural movements and political ideologies impacted national politics, foreign policies, and
societal development.

Capitalism and Technological Innovation – The Capitalism and Technological Innovation
theme encourages the study of the development of the American free enterprise system and its
role in the promotion of exchange, industry, and invention within the economy and its impact on
American society and politics. The American government's role includes promoting economic
growth and regulating significant inequalities resulting from the free enterprise system.

Expansion, Regionalism, and Union – The Expansion, Regionalism, and Union theme
encourages the study of American expansionism and the simultaneous process of socio-
economic division, unity, and the proper role of the federal government in regulation. Over time,
American regions, political factions, and national institutions have experienced divergent and
convergent economic, political, and social perspectives.

Founding Principles and Political Institutions – The Founding Principles and Political
Institutions theme encourages the study of core American political values and institutions,
founding documents, essential political processes, and constitutional debates. Founding



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 107
principles, expressed in seminal documents, serve as the basis of unity, debates, and
compromises over time.

Migration and Mobility – The Migration and Mobility theme encourages the study of the
movement of humans into and throughout North America including reactions to the resulting
demographic, economic, environmental, and political changes. Push and pull factors, significant
migratory patterns, and the natural environment have also impacted movements in American
history.

Natural Rights and Social Development – The Natural Rights and Social Development theme
encourages the study of fundamental American values such as inalienable human rights, social
reform movements, social legislation and the documents therein. American social values were
shaped over time as evidenced in social reform and the resulting legislation. Initiatives
undertaken in order to secure the rights and the blessings of liberty to disenfranchised groups
will also be explored.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 108
   United States History and the Constitution Deconstructed Skills
Indicator                          Expression
CO: Comparison- Utilize            To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of comparison,
similarities and differences       students should:
among multiple historical              ● identify the characteristics of historical events over time,
developments over culture,                place, and culture.
time, and place to create a            ● categorize historical events according to similarities and
comparative analysis.                     differences.
                                       ● construct conclusions about historical events.
                                       ● analyze the reasons for similarities and differences.
CE: Causation- Evaluate            To demonstrate their ability to use the skill of causation,
significant turning points,        students should:
including related causes and            ● justify the long-term and short-term causes and
effects that affect historical             consequences of significant events.
continuity and change.                  ● categorize and compare causes and consequences of
                                           various historical events.
                                        ● differentiate causation from correlation or context.
P: Periodization-                  To demonstrate their ability to think in terms of periodization,
Summarize, analyze, and            students should:
assess the methods historians          ● identify major turning points in American history.
use to categorize historical           ● define and understand the characteristics of an era.
developments in order to               ● describe the methods by which historians categorize
create historical                         events into eras.
periodization.                         ● summarize major events and developments according to
                                          historical eras and themes.
CX: Context- Justify how           To demonstrate their ability to use context, students should:
the relationship between               ● distinguish events based on time and place.
various historical themes and          ● establish connections between relative historical topics.
multiple historical                    ● connect specific events to broad historical themes and
developments create a multi-              developments.
faceted context when
analyzing significant events.
CC: Continuities and               To demonstrate their ability to understand continuities and
Changes- Evaluate                  changes, students should:
significant turning points and         ● define continuity and change.
theme-based patterns of                ● identify patterns of continuity and change
continuities and changes                   chronologically and thematically.
within a period, including             ● compare the relative importance of continuities and
catalysts for those changes.               changes among and transcending periods.
E: Evidence- Identify,             To demonstrate their ability to use evidence in the study of
interpret, and utilize different   history, students should:
forms of evidence, including           ● use historical thinking skills to weigh primary sources
primary and secondary                      and identify point of view, including the effect of the
sources, used in an inquiry-               author’s position, group affiliation, or specific beliefs.
based study of history.                ● discern similarities and differences among multiple

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 109
Indicator                        Expression
                                       points of view.
                                    ● utilize multiple points of view to construct a historical
                                       argument.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 110
           United States History and the Constitution Standards

Key Concepts                                          Standards
                Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the influence of the Atlantic World
                on the regional and national development of republicanism and federalism from
                1607–1815.
                Enduring Understanding: The economic attachment to the Atlantic nurtured the
                gradual cultural separation of the British North American colonies from the rest of
                the British Empire in the 17th century. The North American colonies united
                politically through the 18th century and this ultimately resulted in a proud American
                Republic which utilized Enlightenment ideals to realize a complete constitutional
                revolution by 1815.
                The student will:
                USHC.1.CO         Analyze the development of the American identity through the
                                  founding principles and social and economic development of the
                                  Northern and Southern colonies from 1607–1763 using a
                                  comparative analysis.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into a
                                 comparison of how the distinct geographic regions of the colonies
                                 impacted the early trans-Atlantic economy as well as perspectives
                                 on government. This indicator was written to encourage inquiry
 Foundations                     into how these differences prompted the thirteen colonies to see
 of American                     themselves as exceptionally American by 1754.
Republicanism
                USHC.1.CE        Assess the major developments of the American Revolution
                                 through significant turning points in the debates over independence
                                 and self-government from 1763–1791.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the relative
                                 causes and effects of the American Revolution through an analysis
                                 of the political and social progression of colonial desires for
                                 reform to colonial desires for independence. In addition, this
                                 indicator encourages inquiry into the impact of early founding
                                 documents such as the Declaration of Independence, the Articles
                                 of Confederation, the Constitution, the Federalist Papers and the
                                 Bill of Rights.

                USHC.1.P         Summarize the changing relationship between individuals and the
                                 government during the period 1607–1800.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                                 concept of federalism took hold in the early United States. In
                                 addition, this indicator promotes inquiry into the progression from

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 111
Key Concepts                                         Standards
                                 a nation skeptical of a strong central government to a nation
                                 accepting of a division of power between the states and federal
                                 government.

               USHC.1.CX         Contextualize significant republican developments within North
                                 America’s connection to the Atlantic World.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into events in
                                 North America and Europe that sparked ideas of republicanism in
                                 the British colonies. This indicator was developed to encourage
                                 inquiry into how republican ideals helped some citizens, though
                                 marginalized groups still sought better opportunities and treatment.

               USHC.1.CC         Analyze the processes of continuity and change in the debates over
                                 the proper role of the central government and neutrality in foreign
                                 affairs from 1789–1815.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 continued debates over the role of the federal government in the
                                 affairs of states and citizens as evidenced in the development of the
                                 two party system. In addition, this indicator supports inquiry into
                                 the relationship of the United States with Europe and Native
                                 Americans in the west.

               USHC.1.E          Utilize primary and secondary sources to investigate the impact of
                                 the Atlantic influence in the regional and national development of
                                 Republicanism and Federalism.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the relationship between economic
               and continental expansion and the evolving disagreements over natural rights and
               federalism from 1803–1877.
               Enduring Understanding: The antebellum period is comprised of technological
               and social developments which contributed to dissolution during the Civil War and
               reunion of the United States during Reconstruction. The expansion of the United
               States served as a catalyst for sectionalism in the early 19th century as well as the
 Expansion     reconciliation between federalism and preserving natural rights with compromises
 and Union     before, during, and after the Civil War.

               The student will:
               USHC.2.CO       Compare the economic, political, and social, development of the
                               antebellum North and South from 1803–1860 using a comparative
                               analysis.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 112
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into
                                 sectionalism through an analysis of the emergence of a national
                                 market, changes in the two-party system, and effects on
                                 marginalized groups. Inquiry into the regional interdependence
                                 exemplified by the relationship between the cotton industry in the
                                 South and the factory system of the North is also supported by the
                                 indicator.

               USHC.2.CE         Evaluate the causes and consequences of economic and geographic
                                 expansion through significant turning points from 1803–1865.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes
                                 of American expansion, such as a growing and diversifying
                                 population and the expansion of the plantation economy. This
                                 indicator promotes inquiry into the relationship between
                                 sectionalism and political compromise, culminating in the Civil
                                 War.

               USHC.2.P          Summarize the impact of technological changes and social
                                 developments on the U.S., including the Civil War, during the
                                 period 1815–1865.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 technology fostered the growth of the cotton industry, the factory
                                 system, and urban centers. In addition, this indicator facilitates
                                 inquiry into how the Abolitionist Movement and Women’s Rights
                                 Movements encouraged reforms.

               USHC.2.CX         Contextualize the perspectives on the role of the federal
                                 government in securing natural rights during the period 1830–
                                 1877.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how events
                                 such as the Indian Removal Act, the Civil War, and Reconstruction
                                 prompted examination of the federal government's role in
                                 protecting natural rights. In addition, this indicator supports
                                 inquiry into instances where disputes arose over the power of the
                                 federal government over state governments.

               USHC.2.CC         Differentiate the patterns of continuity and change within the
                                 development of sectionalism and reunion.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                                 legislative and judicial branches responded to sectionalism,

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 113
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                                 emancipation, westward expansion, and early industrialization.
                                 Inquiry into Reconstruction as a significant political and social
                                 turning point in United States history is supported by this
                                 indicator.

               USHC.2.E          Utilize primary and secondary sources to judge the impact of
                                 economic and continental expansion on the evolving
                                 disagreements over natural rights and federalism.

               Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of how innovation and industrialization
               impacted demographic change, reform movements, and American identity from
               1862–1924.
               Enduring Understanding: Industrialization, government support and technological
               growth led to immigration and urbanization, spurring the greatest industrial growth
               in American history. While beneficial overall, these processes contributed to a
               disparity in wealth, igniting reform movements that aimed to regulate business,
               altering the expectation of Americans that government could and perhaps should
               intervene to regulate economic problems.
               The student will:
               USHC.3.CO         Compare the strategies and tactics of the Captains of Industry to
                                 those of the leaders of the labor movement.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 economic, political, and social differences between industrial
                                 leaders and labor leaders. This indicator encourages inquiry into
Capitalism                       the post-Civil War growth of wealth, the conditions of the working
and Reform                       class, and the response to industrialization and urbanization.

               USHC.3.CE         Assess the causes and effects of significant turning points in the
                                 Populist and Progressive era from 1877–1924.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the growth,
                                 decline, and legacy of the Populist Party. This indicator supports
                                 inquiry into the multifaceted objectives of the Progressive
                                 Movement, including political and social reforms, which
                                 influenced both political parties of the period and resulted in
                                 lasting legislation.

               USHC.3.P          Examine the relationship between the expanding corporate
                                 economy and American government during the period 1862–1924.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 economic transformation in the late 19th and early 20th century


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 114
Key Concepts                                          Standards
                                 resulting largely from technological innovations, corporate
                                 structures and government policies. This indicator also promotes
                                 inquiry into Native American efforts to protect tribal rights and
                                 culture as the United States admitted new territories and states in
                                 the west.

               USHC.3.CX         Contextualize demographic changes resulting from economic
                                 development and growth during the Gilded Age.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into factors
                                 influencing migration and immigration such as federal support for
                                 settlement of western territories, increased industrialization and
                                 employment opportunities in major cities, and emergence of ethnic
                                 neighborhoods. This indicator was designed to support inquiry into
                                 additional factors influencing migration and immigration, such as
                                 refugees escaping from poverty, political turmoil, racial conflict,
                                 and natural disasters.

               USHC.3.CC         Analyze significant developments in the settlement of the frontier
                                 between 1862–1924.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 changing economy of the west as well as the popularized concept
                                 of the “closing of the frontier.” Inquiry into the American west
                                 possessing a diverse population consisting of African Americans,
                                 Hispanic, Native American, and immigrants from Europe and Asia
                                 is supported by this indicator.

               USHC.3.E          Utilize a variety of primary and secondary sources to analyze
                                 multiple perspectives of innovation and industrialization on
                                 demographic change, reform, and American identity.

               Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of how the American identity both at
               home and abroad was affected by imperialism, world conflict, and economic boom
               and bust in the period 1893 to 1945.

             Enduring Understanding: Increasing global intervention led to opposing points of
             view regarding America’s proper global role. Emerging global connectedness
             contributed to the Great Depression and a return to neutrality and isolationism.
 Modernism World War II permanently shook America out of a policy of isolationism and
    and      neutrality and into the global society.
Intervention
    ism      The student will:
             USHC.4.CO         Develop a comparative analysis of the motives for and outcomes


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 115
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                                 of American policies regarding foreign intervention.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                                 political and economic motivations for the United States to
                                 intervene in Pacific and Latin American nations. This indicator
                                 was developed to encourage inquiry into the outcomes of
                                 American interventionism in World War I and World War II.

               USHC.4.CE         Evaluate significant turning points, including the immediate and
                                 long-term causes and effects of the business cycles of capitalism.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the causes
                                 and effects of the boom and bust cycles of the 1920s and 1930s.
                                 This indicator prompts inquiry into the continued debate over
                                 laissez-faire capitalism and progressive economic regulation as
                                 exemplified in the New Deal.

               USHC.4.P          Summarize the changing role of the government in the economy
                                 during the period 1917–1945.

                                 This indicator was constructed to facilitate inquiry into how
                                 economic conditions prompted an evolution of fiscal and monetary
                                 policy featuring significant turning points. This indicator also
                                 supports inquiry into the laissez-faire policies of the 1920s, the
                                 balance of free markets and government intervention of the 1930s,
                                 and the command economies during World War I and World War
                                 II.

               USHC.4.CX         Contextualize changes in American culture within new migration
                                 patterns, participation in global conflict, and capitalist business
                                 cycles.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the shaping
                                 of American culture as a result of mass media, African American
                                 cultural and arts movements, and increased consumerism. This
                                 indicator also supports inquiry into the effects of nativism on
                                 government policy, continued discrimination against marginalized
                                 groups, and economic hardships on American culture during the
                                 1920s and 1930s.

               USHC.4.CC         Examine the continuity and changes on the U.S. homefront
                                 surrounding World War I and World War II.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 116
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                                 wartime domestic policies during periods of global conflict. This
                                 indicator also supports inquiry into America’s response to the
                                 Holocaust and the roles of African Americans and women related
                                 to the war effort.

                USHC.4.E         Utilize primary and secondary sources to analyze the impact of
                                 changes in American foreign policy, worldwide conflicts, and
                                 business cycles in capitalism.

                Standard 5: Demonstrate the impact of America’s global leadership on
                technological advancements, the transition to a post-industrial society, and ongoing
                debates over identity in the period 1945–present.
                Enduring Understanding: The Cold War era led to technological advancements
                and an improved standard of living for most Americans. The United States
                contributed to the creation of international organizations meant to contain
                communism and further American interests around the world. Domestically,
                American identity fractured between varying political perspectives.
                The student will:
                USHC.5.CO         Explain the technological developments and economic changes in
                                  the U.S. during the Cold War and post-Cold War eras using a
                                  comparative analysis.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the relative
                                 importance of medical advancements and the beginnings of the
                                 digital age. This indicator fosters inquiry into the new economic,
                                 governmental, and vocational spending policies developed as a
Legacy of the
                                 result of competition with the Soviet Union.
 Cold War
                USHC.5.CE        Assess the immediate and long-term causes and effects through
                                 significant turning points of the Cold War.

                                 This indicator was developed to facilitate inquiry into the rivalry
                                 between the United States and the Soviet Union scientifically,
                                 economically, ideologically, and socially. This indicator also
                                 promotes inquiry into the proxy wars conducted on the Korean
                                 peninsula and in Vietnam.

                USHC.5.P         Summarize the changes in the major American political party
                                 platforms during the period.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                                 different party platforms evolved following World War II. This
                                 indicator promotes inquiry into how the major parties came to
                                 represent different approaches to fiscal and political governance as

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 117
Key Concepts                                         Standards
                                 well as social and judicial policies.

               USHC.5.CX         Contextualize domestic economic development and American
                                 national identity within global politics.

                                 This indicator was designed to support inquiry into the relationship
                                 between the Cold War and post-9/11 eras on the shaping of the
                                 American identity. This indicator also promotes inquiry into the
                                 impact of social and economic developments since the Election of
                                 1980 on the American identity.

               USHC.5.CC         Evaluate continuities and changes during the Civil Rights
                                 Movement and other subsequent movements for equal rights.

                                 This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into thematic
                                 continuities and changes into how marginalized groups sought and
                                 won legal rights. Inquiry into the leadership, methods, and
                                 outcomes of modern equal rights movements are supported by this
                                 indicator.

               USHC.5.E          Utilize primary and secondary sources to judge the impact of
                                 evolving American foreign policy on American identity and
                                 capitalism.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 118
United States Government

Students study United States Government in grade twelve, beginning with the historical and
philosophical principles that led to the development of the American constitutional democracy
and how those fundamental ideas have continued to sustain America’s democratic society.
Students will learn how various powers are granted and distributed among the different branches
and levels of government, and how checks and balances prevent one branch from overpowering
the others. Additionally, students will investigate how American political values are formed and
how government functions through individual participation and policy making. In order to
continue to thrive, a strong democracy relies on active participation by informed individuals
dedicated to upholding the rule of law and individual rights. Overall, the study of United States
Government provides a basis for students to develop the skills necessary to live and thrive in
America’s constitutional democracy and participate in society as active and informed citizens.

Instruction should utilize political science thinking skills and themes developed for grade 12. The
progression of developmentally appropriate political science thinking skills begins in
kindergarten and builds with each year of social studies instruction. These political science
thinking skills are aligned with the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class
knowledge, world-class skills, and life and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one
represent the skills utilized by students in each grade level to further explore the content. These
skills have been deconstructed to aid in the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be
taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to teach
thematically, and to support project- or problem-based learning. To encourage inquiry, the grade
12 United States Government standards are constructed around the following three themes:

Civic Engagement – The Civic Engagement theme encourages the study of and the importance
of active participation in the constitutional democracy of the United States. Active civic
engagement reflects personal values and a society’s prioritization of civil rights and
responsibilities. American constitutional democracy functions upon the key ideas of balance of
powers, the establishment of government by the consent of the governed, and federalism. These
principles guide governmental leaders in creating and enforcing laws that support fundamental
American political values.

Political Values and Institutions – The Political Values and Institutions theme encourages the
study of founding documents and philosophies, the socio-political context in which they were
created and their importance in the continuing development of the constitutional democracy
found in the United States. A practical knowledge of laws, politics, and governmental structure
at the local, state, national, and global level is important in the development of an informed,
involved citizenry.

Process of Law – The Process of Law theme encourages the study of the creation, execution,
and interpretation of law in the United States political system. Founding principles guide the
public policies developed to address new challenges and issues. By design, effective


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 119
governmental decision making at the local, state, national, and global levels is a complex process
that involves compromise and consensus building.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 120
               United States Government Deconstructed Skills

Indicator                      Expression
ER: Establish                  To demonstrate their ability to establish relationships, students
Relationships-                 should:
Clearly state, define, explain,    ● identify and define key terms relating to the study of
and draw connections                   United States government.
between ideas and terms.           ● identify and summarize the main idea, important details,
                                       and cause and effect relationships of government.
IN: Interpret-                 To demonstrate their ability to interpret information from
Gather, interpret, and         multiple sources, students should:
evidence, including primary        ● identify and interpret primary and secondary sources.
and secondary sources, to          ● analyze political cartoons and media sources to detect
analyze data and establish an          multiple perspectives and determine evidence of bias.
informed opinion.                  ● research multiple sources to answer questions related to
                                       the social sciences and to develop an informed opinion.
CC: Communicate and            To demonstrate their ability to communicate and conclude
Conclude-                      informed opinions, students should:
Utilize research from a            ● evaluate multiple sources of information to develop an
variety of sources to discuss          informed opinion.
policies and ideas in order to     ● formulate an informed opinion and engage in positive
create a well-developed                discourse.
argument.                          ● identify and evaluate public policy issues and outcomes
                                       to develop an informed opinion and generate possible
                                       alternative solutions.
                                   ● debate public policy issues, clarify positions on those
                                       issues, and consider opposing viewpoints.
IP: Informed Participation- To demonstrate the practice of informed participation, students
Use acquired knowledge to      should:
engage in the governing            ● use acquired knowledge to participate in the political
process through informed               process as an informed citizen.
decision making.                   ● participate in community events to develop higher levels
                                       of collaboration, problem solving, and interpersonal
                                       skills.
                                   ● utilize technology, resources, and critical thinking skills
                                       to discern legitimacy and detect bias at the local, state,
                                       national, and global level.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 121
                      United States Government Standards

Key Concept
                                                    Standards
              Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental historical and
              philosophical principles and ideas that led to the development of the American
              constitutional democracy.
              Enduring Understanding: The principles of American democracy are reflected in
              the founding documents and actions of federal, state, and local government entities.
              The interpretation and application of American democratic principles continue to
              evolve and be debated.
              The student will:
              USG.1.ER         Analyze the philosophical influences on core political principles in
                               the American constitutional democracy.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the historical
                               and philosophical origins of American government and the purpose
                               of government in a democracy. This includes inquiry into the
                               legacies of Greek democracy and Roman republicanism, as well as
                               the impact of Enlightenment thinkers on the formation of America’s
                               constitutional democracy.

Foundations USG.1.IN           Interpret founding documents and principles that led to the creation
    of                         of the American constitutional democracy.
Democracy
                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the historical
                               and philosophical origins of the American constitutional government
                               presented in the Founding Documents, which provide the structure
                               and framework on which the nation is governed. This indicator also
                               encourages inquiry into the ideas that influenced the Framers of the
                               Constitution and their contributions to the creation of the
                               Constitution.

              USG.1.CC         Analyze the major debates and compromises underlying the
                               formation and ratification of the Constitution.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the crucial
                               events and conflicts that led to the ratification of the United States
                               Constitution. This indicator also encourages inquiry into the major
                               debates and compromises at the Constitutional Convention and how
                               economic, political, and social goals impacted the formation of the
                               new government.

              USG.1.IP         Investigate and communicate the importance of constitutional

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 122
Key Concept
                                                    Standards
                               principles and fundamental values and apply them in abstract and
                               real world situations.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                               American idea of constitutional government has distinctively shaped
                               American society. Further inquiry into this indicator focuses on the
                               extent to which the Constitution is a living document, capable of
                               being altered over time as needed, and how these changes may
                               personally impact students.

              Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the structure and functions of
              government at all levels in the United States.
              Enduring Understanding: In the American constitutional democracy, power is
              widely distributed and checks prevent one branch of government from becoming too
              powerful and seizing powers from the other branches of government. National, state,
              and local governments are in positions where they must all compete and cooperate in
              order to govern effectively.
              The student will:
              USG.2.ER        Explain the authority, organization, purposes, and responsibilities of
                              the three branches of government as enumerated in Articles I–III in
                              the Constitution.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the formal
                               and informal structure, roles, and operations of the legislative,
                               executive, and judicial branches of the national government,
Government
                               including the specific powers of each branch. Additionally, this
 Structure                     indicator promotes inquiry into the extent to which the three
                               branches are interdependent.

              USG.2.IN         Analyze how power and responsibility are distributed, shared, and
                               limited in the American constitutional government.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the
                               principles of American democracy are reflected in the Constitution
                               and the Bill of Rights, as well as in the organization and actions of
                               federal, state, and local governmental entities. Further inquiry
                               encourages discourse on how the interpretation and application of
                               American democratic principles continue to evolve over time.

              USG.2.CC         Explain how governments in South Carolina are organized and how
                               they function in the American constitutional government.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how state

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 123
Key Concept
                                                    Standards
                               and local governments are organized and how they function under
                               the American constitutional government. This indicator encourages
                               further inquiry into how federalism provides for several levels of
                               government supported by many state and local officials.

              USG.2.IP         Synthesize why the rule of law has a central place in American
                               society and the impact it has on the American political system.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how the U.S.
                               Constitution shapes the actions of governments and politics, draws
                               its authority from the people, and defines the extent and limits of
                               government power and the rights of citizens. This indicator also
                               promotes inquiry into the reasons particular laws have been passed
                               and the role of the federal and state judiciary system to resolve
                               arising controversies.

              Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the political process in determining
              and shaping public policy and the political climate in the United States.
              Enduring Understanding: American political beliefs are shaped by an
              understanding of founding principles, core values, and changing demographics that
              in turn shape one’s belief about government and ideological trends related to public
              policy. Governing is achieved through an individual's participation in government
              both directly and indirectly which results in multiple avenues for influence on the
              policy making process.
              The student will:
              USG.3.ER        Describe the policy making process in the American constitutional
                              government.

    The                        This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into public policy
  Political                    as a result of interactions among various stakeholders, institutions,
  Process                      and processes. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how public
                               policy is made at all levels of government and how investigations of
                               these policy networks in domestic, economic, and foreign policy
                               shows relationships to federalism, the impact of interest groups,
                               parties, and elections.

              USG.3.IN         Interpret how American political beliefs are shaped by the founding
                               principles, core values, and changing demographics of America, and
                               how those beliefs led to the creation of ideological trends which
                               affect public policy over time.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the variety of
                               beliefs that individual citizens hold about their government, their

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 124
Key Concept
                                                    Standards
                               leaders, and the United States political system in general and how
                               those beliefs are formed and evolve over time. The indicator also
                               promotes inquiry into how citizen beliefs about government are
                               shaped by a variety of factors and ultimately leads to political
                               ideologies that shape and influence public debates and choices in the
                               American constitutional government.

              USG.3.CC         Investigate the role of linkage institutions (i.e. media, interest
                               groups, political parties), and explain how they shape public agenda
                               and opinion.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                               organizations and mechanisms that allow citizens to indirectly
                               organize and communicate their interests and concerns which
                               influence the public agenda and public policy.

              USG.3.IP         Explain how the electoral process works in federal elections and the
                               effects those elections have on U.S. government.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how to gauge
                               the fairness and effectiveness of the electoral process in the U.S. and
                               the outcomes elections have on the U.S. government. This indicator
                               was also developed to prompt inquiry into the historic struggles over
                               the extension of suffrage and the impact of federal policies on
                               campaigning and electoral rules.

            Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of the rights and responsibilities
            associated with citizenship in the United States.
            Enduring Understanding: A strong constitutional democracy requires active
            participation on behalf of the people living under its authority. Knowledge of how to
            become a citizen, the rights and responsibilities of citizenship, and an understanding
            of how to participate in the political process helps to create civic engagement and
            preserve the American constitutional government.
            The student will:
Citizenship USG.4.ER         Describe the criteria and process for immigration to and citizenship
                             in the U.S., and explain how the U.S. has expanded and limited the
                             concept of citizenship over time.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                               individuals become citizens in the U.S. and how the U.S. has
                               expanded and limited citizenship over time. Further, examination
                               promotes inquiry into the rights and responsibilities held by citizens
                               of the U.S.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 125
Key Concept
                                                     Standards


              USG.4.IN         Distinguish between various economic, personal, and political rights
                               of citizens in the U.S., and how these rights can sometimes conflict
                               with each other.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the rights the
                               Constitution protects and the responsibilities citizens have through
                               active participation to ensure those rights for themselves and future
                               generations. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how the
                               Constitution of the United States, Bill of Rights, and additional
                               amendments emphasize liberty and individual rights and how these
                               rights often conflict with each other.

              USG.4.CC         Analyze contemporary issues and governmental responses at various
                               levels in terms of how they have provided equal protection under the
                               law and equal access to society’s opportunities and public facilities.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how
                               individual rights have evolved through social movements,
                               constitutional provisions, and landmark legislation. Further
                               investigation prompts inquiry into how marginalized Americans
                               have struggled and continue to push for equality and expanded
                               rights.

              USG.4.IP         Describe and evaluate the ways citizens can participate in the
                               political process at the local, state, national, and global levels.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                               responsibilities associated with citizenship in the United States and
                               the importance of those responsibilities in a democratic society.
                               This indicator also promotes inquiry into the function of civic
                               participation in addressing public issues and the importance of
                               discussing issues and making judgements with balanced information,
                               evidence, civility, respect, and fairness.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 126
Economics and Personal Finance

Students study economics and personal finance beginning with how humans address the
fundamental problem of scarcity by making choices based on the existence of limited resources.
Using the skills of the economist, students will learn how rational decisions are made using
marginal analysis, and that all choices are met with consequences. Students will investigate how
personal financial decisions related to careers, spending, and short- and long-term goal setting
impact one’s standard of living and long-term financial well-being. Traditionally, the field of
economics is divided into two categories: microeconomics and macroeconomics. In the domain
of microeconomics, students will survey the impact of demand, supply, various market
structures, and government policies have on market prices for goods, services, and wages for
workers. Inquiry into macroeconomics involves observing trends in the economy at large and the
policies that are undertaken to promote the economic well-being of a society. Holistically, the
study of economics and personal finance provides a basis for students to develop the skills
necessary to live and thrive financially in the 21st century, and participate in society as active
and informed decision-makers.

Instruction should utilize the economic thinking skills and themes developed for economics and
personal finance. The progression of the developmentally appropriate economic thinking skills
begins in kindergarten and builds with each year of social studies instruction. These economic
thinking skills are aligned with the Profile of the South Carolina Graduate of world-class
knowledge, world-class skills, and life and career characteristics. The indicators of standard one
represent the skills utilized by students in each grade level to further explore the content. These
skills have been deconstructed to aid in the scaffolding of student thinking and are not to be
taught in isolation.

The Social Studies grade-level standards can be categorized into content- and discipline-specific
themes. These themes allow for connections to be made between content, the ability to teach
thematically, and to support project- or problem-based learning. To encourage inquiry, the
Economics and Personal Finance standards are constructed around the following three themes:

Exchange and Markets – The Exchange and Markets theme encourages the study of how
individuals engage in voluntary exchange when both parties determine that the benefits outweigh
the costs. Markets have evolved over time in order to facilitate the exchange of goods and
services, while prices and wages fluctuate based on competition within the marketplace.

Indicators and Policy Making – The Indicators and Policy Making theme encourages the
analysis of economic indicators as a measure of the health of the economy and its progress
toward economic goals. Government policies are used to stabilize the economy, prioritize
economic goals, and facilitate global interaction. Various philosophies and schools of economic
thought influence economic decisions and public policies.

Role of Incentives – The Role of Incentives theme encourages the study of how decisions are
made at the local, state, national and global levels as a result of scarce resources. In order to set
goals, engaged participants utilize cost-benefit analysis by understanding the role of self-interests
and consequences in the decision-making process.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 127
          Economics and Personal Finance Deconstructed Skills

Indicator                      Expression
ER: Establish                  To demonstrate their ability to establish relationships, students
Relationships-                 should:
Clearly state, define, explain,    ● identify and define key terms relating to the study of
and draw connections                   economics and personal finance.
between ideas and terms.           ● identify and summarize main idea, important details, and
                                       cause and effect relationships on the economy.
IN: Interpret-                 To demonstrate their ability to interpret information from
Gather, interpret, and         multiple sources, students should:
construct data and graphs to       ● explore and utilize data to evaluate the cost and benefits
evaluate the impact of                 of economic and financial choices.
changes in the economy.            ● identify and analyze important data used to assess
                                       economic well-being.
                                   ● gather data and information from multiple sources to
                                       identify bias and create an informed perspective.
                                   ● analyze and create charts, graphs, and infographics to
                                       illustrate the impact of changes in economic conditions.
CC: Communicate and            To demonstrate their ability to communicate and conclude
Conclude-                      informed opinions, students should:
Utilize research from a            ● demonstrate civil discourse in interactions concerning
variety sources to discuss             decision-making.
policies and ideas in order to     ● identify and evaluate economic issues and outcomes to
create a well-developed                develop an informed opinion and generate possible
argument.                              alternative solutions.
                                   ● evaluate multiple sources of information to develop and
                                       communicate an informed opinion.
                                   ● debate economic issues, clarify positions on those issues,
                                       and consider opposing viewpoints.
IP: Informed Participation- To demonstrate the practice of informed participation, students
Use acquired knowledge to      should:
engage in the marketplace          ● investigate a variety of financial options and make
through informed decision              decisions based on sound economic practices.
making.                            ● evaluate the impact of policy decisions at the local, state,
                                       national and global spheres and take a stand.
                                   ● use the tools of economic analysis to actively participate
                                       in the market as an informed consumer and worker.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 128
                  Economics and Personal Finance Standards
Key Concept                                         Standards
              Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of fundamental economic concepts at an
              individual, business, and governmental level.
              Enduring Understanding: The study of economics enables students to make
              informed decisions about limited resources. Scarcity is an unavoidable reality
              because societies do not have enough productive resources to satisfy the wants and
              needs of all individuals. Therefore, choices must be made concerning the production
              and distribution of resources. Understanding basic economic concepts allows
              students to adequately compete for resources in the marketplace.
              The student will:
              EPF.1.ER Examine how scarcity of time and resources necessitates decision-
                             making.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how people
                             and societies compete for and allocate resources. The indicator was
                             also designed to promote inquiry into how scarcity necessitates
                             choices of certain resources over others.

              EPF.1.IN       Research and utilize evidence to explain how various economic
                             systems address the basic economic questions regarding distribution
 Economic                    of resources.
 Concepts
                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how a
                             society’s economic system helps deal with the fundamental economic
                             problem of scarcity. This indicator also prompts the exploration of
                             multiple sources of information and data to analyze the advantages
                             and disadvantages of different types of economic systems throughout
                             the world, and their outcomes on economic and societal well-being.


              EPF.1.CC       Determine how society’s allocation of resources impacts economic
                             well-being using a production possibilities curve.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the production
                             alternatives encountered by societies using the production
                             possibilities curve. This indicator also promotes inquiry into how the
                             production possibilities model can be used to illustrate the impact of
                             changes in resources and economic growth, while also providing the
                             basis for trade.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 129
Key Concept                                        Standards
              EFP.1.IP       Evaluate how short-term goals allow individuals and institutions to
                             make rational decisions using marginal analysis.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the use of
                             rational decision-making using marginal analysis. This indicator also
                             encourages inquiry into the processes utilized by individuals,
                             businesses, and governmental agencies to set long- and short-term
                             goals.

              Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of how scarcity and choice influence
              individual financial decisions.
              Enduring Understanding: Financial literacy is imperative in making individual
              economic decisions regarding spending, careers, and setting short- and long-term
              financial goals. The tools of decision-making and marginal analysis are essential in
              evaluating possible financial options. The ability to make wise choices can impact
              one’s standard of living and future earning potential.
              The student will:
              EPF.2.ER Research and analyze the factors that impact personal income and
                             long-term earning potential.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the factors
                             that influence personal income. It also prompts inquiry into various
                             post-secondary options and the opportunity cost incurred when
                             various college or career paths are taken.

 Financial    EPF.2.IN       Identify and explain the functions of different types of financial
 Literacy                    institutions and how they assist individuals in achieving short- and
                             long-term financial goals.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into how financial
                             institutions act as intermediaries between savers and borrowers, and
                             how they facilitate the flow of money in the economy. This indicator
                             also prompts the examination of the relationship between financial
                             institutions and the public to enable liquidity and facilitate economic
                             growth.

              EPF.2.CC       Determine financially responsible ways that individuals acquire and
                             use credit.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the various
                             forms of credit and the advantages and disadvantages of using credit
                             for purchases. This indicator also encourages inquiry into the
                             importance of establishing and maintaining good credit and the
                             indicators of creditworthiness.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 130
Key Concept                                           Standards

                 EPF.2.IP      Develop a personal finance strategy for investing, protecting,
                               purchasing, and saving resources.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the process of
                               effectively managing income by creating a personal budget. Further
                               inquiry into this indicator encourages active discourse on the merits
                               and consequences of saving and investing.

                 Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of basic microeconomic principles.
                 Enduring Understanding: Microeconomics investigates the impact of individual
                 decisions on the distribution of scarce resources. A working knowledge of supply
                 and demand and market structures is necessary to understand the study of
                 microeconomics. Changes in demand, supply, and the level of competition in
                 various market structures can affect price and output levels for consumers and profit
                 levels for producers.
                 The student will:
                 EPF.3.ER Apply the laws of supply and demand to determine how changes in
                                market conditions affect prices.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                               development of markets through the interaction of supply and
                               demand, and how prices emerge to act as signals concerning the
                               allocation of resources.

Microeconomics   EPF.3.IN      Compare and contrast how the organization of various market
                               structures affects decisions and outcomes of individuals and firms.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the
                               characteristics of different market structures, their merits and
                               limitations, and how these impact decision-making and the welfare of
                               both consumers and producers.

                 EPF.3.CC      Illustrate market equilibrium and the impact of shifts in supply and
                               demand, different elasticities, and price controls on market output and
                               price.

                               This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the reasons
                               for changes in market price and quantity. Inquiry into this indicator
                               examines how market conditions and policies alter market
                               equilibrium and economic incentives.
                 EPF.3.IP      Research and evaluate geopolitical influences on employment trends
                               and issues at the state and national level.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 131
Key Concept                                          Standards

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into state and
                              national trends and issues in the job market. This indicator also
                              prompts inquiry into how international trade, geography, government
                              policies, collective bargaining, labor market conditions, and the prices
                              of goods and services affect employment trends.

                 Standard 4: Demonstrate an understanding of basic macroeconomic principles.
                 Enduring Understanding: Macroeconomics focuses on the behavior and
                 performance of the economy as a whole. Analysis of macroeconomic data provides
                 important information pertaining to the economic well-being of a society and
                 prompts governments to make reasonable corrections as necessary. Government
                 intervention is often used to stabilize and safeguard the economy; however, it is
                 frequently met with strong reactions and opinions from both the public and
                 institutions alike.
                 The student will:
                 EPF.4.ER Identify and analyze important economic indicators and data used to
                                 gauge the economic well-being of a society.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how
                              individuals, businesses, the government, and the foreign sector
                              interact and how economic indicators, such as Gross Domestic
                              Product, unemployment and inflation data, are used to measure the
                              health of an economy.

Macroeconomics
                 EPF.4.IN     Provide justification for or against regulation in a free-enterprise
                              system.

                              This indicator was designed to encourage inquiry into how the United
                              States government and other entities promote the economic goals of
                              price stability, full employment, and economic growth through the
                              use of fiscal and monetary policies. This indicator also investigates
                              the role of the Federal Reserve system in overseeing the U.S. banking
                              system and regulating the money supply in the economy.

                 EPF.4.CC     Evaluate the impact of globalization and trade on the economic well-
                              being of a country.

                              This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into the positive
                              and negative effects of globalization and trade on individuals,
                              businesses, and countries. As a result of the interconnectedness of
                              markets throughout the world, societies adopt policies that promote
                              and/or discourage trade liberalization, which may include
                              international organizations, treaties, tariffs, quotas and embargoes.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 132
Key Concept                                          Standards

              EPF.4.IP       Investigate contemporary economic policies, and analyze how
                             political ideologies influenced their implementation.

                             This indicator was developed to encourage inquiry into recent and
                             currently debated economic policies and their possible effects on
                             individuals, businesses, and the American political system. This
                             indicator was designed to encourage the use of economic reasoning to
                             promote critical thinking about significant policy issues and their
                             impact on the well-being of individuals and economic growth of
                             societies.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 133
Teaching the History and Literature of the Old and New Testament Era

According to South Carolina legislation:

       A school district board of trustees may authorize, to be taught in the district's high
       schools, an elective course concerning the history and literature of the Old Testament era
       and an elective course concerning the history and literature of the New Testament era.

       Each course offered must be taught in an objective manner with no attempt to influence
       the students as to either the truth or falsity of the materials presented (S.C. Code Ann. §
       59- 29-230).




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 134
    Teaching the History and Literature of the Old Testament Era
                             Standards
Key Concepts                                       Standards
               Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the Old Testament on the history,
               religion, government, and laws of various cultures.
               Enduring Understanding: Customs and cultures of peoples and societies are
               recorded in the Old Testament. The Old Testament can be evaluated for its impact
               on art, culture, customs, history, government, literature, law, morals, music, and
               values.
               The student will:
               OT.1.1            Contextualize the historical and geographical developments of the
                                 Old Testament including its origin, methods and tools of writing,
                                 and the means by which it has been preserved.
  History
               OT.1.2           Analyze continuities and changes in the translations of biblical texts
                                over time.

               OT.1.3           Create a comparative analysis of Old Testament cultures from
                                distinct geographic regions, including Sumerian, Egyptian, Hebrew,
                                and Babylonian.

               OT.1.4           Create a narrative analyzing the biblical traditions and their
                                influences on contemporary cultures including customs,
                                government, history, law, morals, and values.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the characters, narratives, poetry, and
               stories in the Old Testament, and explain how they are used in literature.
               Enduring Understanding: Various authors created a collection of books commonly
               known as the Old Testament. The Old Testament has diverse artistry, content, and
               form encouraging literary analysis.
               The student will:
               OT.2.1           Analyze the influence of biblical texts on the development of the
                                English language.
 Literature
               OT.2.2           Analyze and critique how the author uses structures such as letters,
                                poems, songs, and speeches in biblical texts to shape meaning and
                                impact the reader.

               OT.2.3           Analyze and provide evidence of how the author’s choice of point of
                                view, perspective, and purpose shape content, meaning, and style
                                within the Old Testament.

               OT.2.4           Analyze how complex text structures in biblical texts contribute to


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 135
Key Concepts                                        Standards
                                the development of plot, setting, or theme.

               OT.2.5           Analyze a complex set of ideas or sequence of events, and explain
                                how specific characters, events, or ideas develop and interact within
                                biblical text.

               OT.2.6           Explain the influence of the Old Testament in classic and
                                contemporary drama, poetry, prose, and other media.

               Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the influence of the Old Testament
               on the visual and performing arts.
               Enduring Understanding: Artists create works of art for historically significant
               purposes. Works of art help us develop ideas and understandings of culture, history,
               and society through interactions with and analysis of art forms.
               The student will:
               OT.3.1          Analyze the artistic presentation of the Old Testament through
                               creative dance, music, theatre, the visual arts, and writing from
                               various cultural and historical perspectives.

    Arts       OT.3.2           Interpret ideas, subject matter, symbols, and themes found in
                                creative dance, music theater, the visual arts, and writing derived
                                from the Old Testament.

               OT.3.3           Explain the design, function, and significance of architecture and
                                religious artifacts found in places of worship such as cathedrals,
                                churches, synagogues, tabernacles, and temples.

               OT.3.4           Create a response to biblical texts through a variety of methods such
                                as creative dance, music theater, the visual arts, and writing.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 136
   Teaching the History and Literature of the New Testament Era
                            Standards

Key Concepts                                       Standards
               Standard 1: Demonstrate an understanding of the New Testament on the history,
               government, laws, and religion of various cultures.
               Enduring Understanding: Customs and cultures of the peoples and societies are
               recorded in the New Testament. The New Testament can be evaluated for its impact
               on art, culture, customs, history, government, literature, law, morals, music, and
               values.
               The student will:
               NT.1.1            Contextualize the historical and geographical developments of the
                                 New Testament, including its origin, methods and tools of writing,
                                 and the means by which it has been preserved.

               NT.1.2           Analyze continuities and changes in the translations of biblical texts
                                over time.
  History
               NT.1.3           Create a comparative analysis of New Testament cultures, including
                                Roman, Greek, and Hebrew.

               NT.1.4           Create a narrative analyzing the rise and growth of Christianity
                                including patterns of expansion across continents, the effects of
                                diffusion on religious beliefs and traditions, and the influence of
                                Christianity on culture and politics.

               NT.1.5           Identify, source, and utilize different forms of evidence (including
                                primary and secondary sources) to investigate and explain biblical
                                traditions and their influences on contemporary cultures including
                                customs, government, history, law, morals, and values.

               Standard 2: Demonstrate an understanding of the characters, narratives, poetry, and
               stories in the New Testament, and explain how they are used in literature.
               Enduring Understanding: Various authors created a collection of books commonly
               known as the New Testament. The New Testament has diverse artistry, content, and
               form encouraging literary analysis.
               The student will:
 Literature
               NT.2.1           Analyze the influence of biblical texts on the development of the
                                English language.

               NT.2.2           Analyze and critique how the author uses structures such as letters,
                                poems, songs, and speeches in biblical texts to shape meaning and
                                impact the reader.

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 137
Key Concepts                                         Standards
               NT.2.3           Analyze and provide evidence of how the author’s choice of point of
                                view, perspective, and purpose shape content, meaning, and style
                                within the New Testament.

               NT.2.4           Analyze how complex text structures in biblical texts contribute to
                                the development of plot, setting, or theme.

               NT.2.5           Analyze a complex set of ideas or sequence of events, and explain
                                how specific characters, events, or ideas develop and interact within
                                biblical text.

               NT.2.6           Explain the influence of the New Testament in classic and
                                contemporary drama, poetry, prose, and other media.

               Standard 3: Demonstrate an understanding of the influence of the New Testament
               on the visual and performing arts.
               Enduring Understanding: Artists create works of art for historically significant
               purposes. Works of art help us develop ideas and understandings of culture, history,
               and society through interactions with and analysis of art forms.
               The student will:
               NT.3.1          Analyze the artistic presentation of the New Testament through
                               creative dance, music, theatre, the visual arts, and writing from
                               various cultural and historical perspectives.

    Arts       NT.3.2           Interpret ideas, subject matter, symbols, and themes found in
                                creative dance, music theater, the visual arts, and writing derived
                                from the New Testament.

               NT.3.3           Explain the design, function, and significance of architecture and
                                religious artifacts found in places of worship such as cathedrals,
                                churches, synagogues, tabernacles, and temples.

               NT.3.4           Create a response to biblical texts through a variety of methods such
                                as creative dance, music, theatre, the visual arts, and writing.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 138
References

Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing:
      A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York: Longman.

Baldwin, N. (2005). The American revelation: Ten ideals that shaped our country from the
      Puritans to the cold war. New York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.

Blight, D.W., & Downs, J. (Eds.). (2017). Beyond freedom: Disrupting the history of
        emancipation. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press.

Burton, O.V. (2007) The age of Lincoln. New York, NY: Hill and Wang.

Calder, L. (2006). Uncoverage: Toward signature pedagogy for the history survey. Journal of
       American History, 92, 1358-1370.

Costello, M. (2014). Teaching the movement 2014: The state of civil rights education in the
       United States. Montgomery, AL: The Southern Poverty Law Center.

Costello, M. (2018). Teaching hard history: American slavery. Montgomery, AL: The Southern
       Poverty Law Center.

Crowley, R. M., & King, L. J. (2018). Making inquiry critical: Examining power and inequity in
      the classroom. Social Education, 82(1), 14-17.

Davidson, J.W. & Lytle, M.H. (2000). After the fact: The art of historical detection, fourth
      edition. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.

Delpit, L. (2006). Other people's children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New York, NY:
        The New Press.

Diamond, J. (2005). Guns, germs, and steel: The fate of human societies. New York, NY: W.W.
      Norton and Company.

Edgar, W. (1998). South Carolina: A history. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.

Edgar, W. (2006). The South Carolina encyclopedia. Columbia, SC: University of South
       Carolina Press.

Georgia Department of Education. (2012). Social studies Georgia performance standards.
       Retrieved from https://www.engageny.org/resource/new-york-state-k-12-social-studies-
       framework

Gersmehl, P. (2014). Teaching geography, 3rd edition. New York, NY: Guilford.
Grant, S.G., & Gradwell, J.M. (Eds.) (2010). Teaching history with big ideas: Cases of ambitious
       teachers. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Education


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 139
Grant, S.G. & VanSledright, B.A. (2014). Elementary social studies: Constructing a powerful
       approach to teaching and learning, third edition. New York, NY: Routledge.

Heffron, S. G., & Downs, R. M. (2012). Geography for life: National geography standards, 2nd
       edition. Washington, D.C.: National Council for Geographic Education.

Hess, D.E. (2009). Controversy in the classroom: The democratic power of discussion. New
       York, NY: Taylor and Francis.

Hess, K. (2017). Hess cognitive rigor matrix (social studies and humanities CRM): Applying
       Webb’s depth of knowledge levels to Bloom’s cognitive process dimensions. Retrieved
       from resources.corwin.com/sites/default/files/tool_4_1.pdf

Howe, D.W. (2009). What hath God wrought: The transformation of America, 1815-1848. New
      York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Journell, W. (2009). An incomplete history: Representation of American Indians in state social
       studies standards. Journal of American Indian Education, 48(2), 18-32.

Levstik, L.S. & Barton, K.C. (2015). Doing history: Investigating with children in elementary
       and middle schools, fifth edition. Nahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates.

Mandell, N., & Malone, B. (2008). Thinking like a historian: Rethinking history instruction.
      Madison, WI: Wisconsin Historical Society Press.

Menkart, D., Murray, A.D., & View, J.L. (Eds.) (2004). Putting the movement back into civil
      rights teaching. Washington, DC: Teaching for Change.

Metro, R. (2017). Teaching U.S. history thematically: Document-based lessons for the secondary
       classroom. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.

Michigan Department of Education. (2015). Michigan (draft) K-12 social studies standards.
      Retrieved from
      http://www.michigan.gov/documents/mde/SS_COMBINED_August_2015_496557_7.pd
      f

National Center for History in the Schools. (1996). National standards for history. Los Angeles,
       CA: University of California Los Angeles.

National Council for the Social Studies. (2013). College, career, and civic life (C3) framework
       for social studies standards: Guidance for enhancing the rigor of K-12 civics, economics,
       geography, and history. Silver Spring, MD: National Council for the Social Studies.

National Council for the Social Studies. (2010). National curriculum standards for social studies:
       A framework for teaching, learning, and assessment. Washington, DC: National Council


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 140
       for the Social Studies.

New York State Education Department. (2014). New York state K-12 social studies framework.
     Retrieved from https://www.engageny.org/resource/new-york-state-k-12-social-studies-
     framework

Shanahan, T. & Shanahan, C. (2008). Teaching disciplinary literacy to adolescents: Rethinking
      content-area literacy. Harvard Educational Review, 78(1), 40-59.

Shanahan, T. & Shanahan, C. (2012). What is disciplinary literacy and why does it matter?
      Topics in Language Disorders, 32(1), 7-18.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-10.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-120.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-130.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-155.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-179.

South Carolina Code of Laws, § 59-29-180.

South Carolina Department of Education. (2011). South Carolina Social Studies Academic
       Standards. Retrieved from https://ed.sc.gov/scdoe/assets/file/agency/ccr/Standards-
       Learning/documents/FINALAPPROVEDSSStandardsAugust182011.pdf

South Carolina Education Accountability Act, § 59-25-110.

Stern, S.M., & Stern, J.A. (2011). The state of state U.S. history standards 2011. Washington,
        DC: The Fordham Institute.

Tennessee Department of Education. (2017). Tennessee social studies standards. Retrieved from
      https://www.tn.gov/assets/entities/sbe/attachments/7-28-
      17_IV_C_Social_Studies_Standards_Attachment.pdf

The College Board. (2012). AP economics course description. Retrieved from
      http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/pdf/ap/ap-economics-course-
      description.pdf
The College Board. (2017). AP European course and exam description. Retrieved from
      https://secure-media.collegeboard.org/digitalServices/pdf/ap/ap-european-history-course-
      and-exam-description.pdf

The College Board. (2015). AP human geography course description. Retrieved from
      https://apcentral.collegeboard.org/pdf/ap-human-geography-course-


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 141
       description.pdf?course=ap-human-geography

The College Board. (2014). AP United States government and politics course description.
      Retrieved from https://apcentral.collegeboard.org/pdf/ap-us-government-and-politics-
      course-description.pdf?course=ap-united-states-government-and-politics

The College Board. (2017). AP United States history course and exam description. Retrieved
      from http://media.collegeboard.com/digitalServices/pdf/ap/ap-us-history-course-and-
      exam-description.pdf

The College Board. (2017). AP world history course and exam description. Retrieved from
      https://apcentral.collegeboard.org/pdf/ap-world-history-course-and-exam-
      description.pdf?course=ap-world-history

TransformSC. (2014). Profile of the South Carolina graduate. Retrieved from
       http://sccompetes.org/transformsc/

Turk, D.B., Dull, L.J., Cohan, R., & Stoll, M.R. (Eds.) (2014). Teaching recent global history:
       Dialogues among historians, social studies teachers, and students. New York, NY:
       Routledge.

Utah Education Network. (2017). Social studies core. Retrieved from
      http://www.uen.org/core/socialstudies/

Virginia Department of Education. (2015). Standards of learning for history and social science.
       Retrieved from
       http://www.doe.virginia.gov/testing/sol/standards_docs/history_socialscience/2015/index.
       shtml

Walsh, J.A., & Sattes, B.D. (2011). Thinking through quality questioning: Deepening student
       engagement. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin: A SAGE Company.

Webb, N. (2002). Depth-of-knowledge levels for four content areas. Unpublished paper.

Webb, N. (1997). Research Monograph Number 6: “Criteria for alignment of expectations and
      assessments on mathematics and science education. Washington, D.C.: CCSSO.

Wiggins, G.P. & McTighe, J. (2005). Understanding by design. Alexandria, VA: Association for
      Supervision and Curriculum Development.

Wineburg, S. (2001). Historical thinking and other unnatural acts: Charting the future of teaching
      the past. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press

Wineburg, S., Martin, D., & Monte-Santo, C. (2013). Reading like a historian: Teaching literacy
      in middle and high school history classrooms. New York, NY: Teachers College Press.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 142
Appendix A
Primary (K–2) Skills Progression

                                                                  History Skills
                                       Kindergarten                                Grade 1                          Grade 2

                                  Identify similarities and             Identify similarities and       Identify and compare significant
                              differences between oneself and          differences between one’s         historical events, moments, and
       Comparison                          others.                    community and other South              symbols in U.S. history.
                                                                    Carolina communities over time.



                                                                    Analyze a current event in South   Identify current or past U.S. events
        Causation             This skill is introduced in grade                                        and discuss the possible causes and
                                                                     Carolina and make predictions
                                              one.                                                                   effects.
                                                                       about possible outcomes.


                                                                                                 Analyze patterns of continuities and
                                                                    Explain how lives and        changes  within U. S. history through
    Continuities and                                                                             the use of evidence from a variety of
                            Identify ways in which individuals communities change or stay the
       Changes
                            change or stay the same over time. same over time because of current sources, such as graphic organizers,
                                                                            events.              maps, photographs/images, texts, and
                                                                                                               timelines.


                                Identify different forms of         Evaluate different forms of
                            evidence used in historical inquiry evidence used in historical inquiry, Evaluate different forms of evidence
         Evidence             such as digital sources, maps,        such as art, artifacts, digital     used in historical inquiry and
                              photographs/images, or texts.         sources, graphs, maps, oral           determine their validity.
                                                                 histories, photographs/images, or
                                                                                texts.


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 143
                                                             Geography Skills
                                       Kindergarten                        Grade 1                                  Grade 2

                               Identify a map, various map                                              Describe and compare various
                                                                    Identify various types of maps,
                             features, and explain the purpose                                       landforms over time within the U. S.
          Maps                                                      map features, and the purpose of
                                          of maps.                                                      through the use of primary and
                                                                                 maps.
                                                                                                              secondary sources.
                                                                                                                       .

                        Utilize sources of geographic
                      information  (e.g., digital sources,            Describe and compare various
  Gather Evidence and                                                                                  Identify the geographic location of
                                                                    landforms within South Carolina
 Communicate Findings maps, or photographs/images) to                                                 the U.S. in relation to the rest of the
                       define and identify cultural and              through the use of primary and
                                                                                                                      world.
                               natural features.                           secondary sources.



                            Describe and compare the cultural
                             and natural environment around Identify and differentiate between         Explain how the distribution of
     Conditions and
                                one’s home and school by                                              human features, physical features,
      Connections                                             rural, suburban, and urban areas
                                  constructing a visual                                               and natural resources in the U. S.
                                                                   within South Carolina.
                                     representation.                                                     impact economic activity.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 144
                                                              Economic Skills
                                       Kindergarten                         Grade 1                               Grade 2

                                                                                               Examine the purpose of currency and
                              Identify and compare wants and Compare goods and services in the
 Establish Relationships                                       school, community, and state.    how income, savings, and spending
                                           needs.
                                                                                                       are parts of a budget


                                                                                                   Explain how budgets change as wants
        Interpret              Explain how wants and needs          Explain how goods and services and needs or the availability of goods
                                    change over time.                      change over time.               and services change.



                                                                Research and describe how goods Create a simple budget and articulate
   Communicate and          Explain why people have jobs, and                                     the priorities using economic terms
                                                                   and services differ in rural,
      Conclude              describe the economic benefits for                                      such as expenses, income, and
                                                               suburban, and urban areas in South
                                   self and community.                                                           savings.
                                                                            Carolina.


                        Identify an economic want or need Identify an economic want or need        Interpret data to show how
 Informed Participation   at one’s school or community at the local or state level and create geographic location and available
                            level and create a solution.  a solution in the form of a good or resources impact economic decision-
                                                                       a service.                            making.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 145
                                                      Civics and Government Skills
                               Kindergarten                         Grade 1                                  Grade 2

                                                              Demonstrate how civic          Identify cultural and ethnic groups in the
                    Identify similarities and differences dispositions encourage citizens
                                                                                              U.S., explore their characteristics, and
   Establish        between people and discuss ways to        with diverse beliefs and      communicate how civic dispositions build
  Relationships       protect and respect all people by backgrounds to work together for
                                                                                            relationships between groups in a diverse
                        practicing civic dispositions.            a common goal.                               society.


                                                           Describe the basic purpose,
                      Explain the purpose of rules and                                      Use primary and secondary sources to
                                                        structure, and function of South
    Interpret        laws, and discuss consequences of                                   research a national figure who demonstrated
                                                       Carolina’s government at both the
                              breaking them.                                                          civic dispositions.
                                                              local and state level.


              Establish and practice classroom
              rules and procedures for listening  Demonstrate ways to display
Communicate &                                                                                 Analyze how rights are granted to U.S.
  Conclude     and responding appropriately to active and responsible citizenship            citizens through the founding documents.
                           others.               in local and state government.



                    Collaborate with others to identify a Collaborate with others to identify,
   Informed           classroom or school issue and           resolve, and communicate         Use evidence to propose and communicate a
  Participation      propose a resolution using civic       resolutions on a local or state           resolution to a national issue.
                               dispositions.                             issue.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 146
Appendix B
Historical Thinking Skills

Historical thinking skills are the analysis, reading, and writing that are necessary to develop our
understanding of the past. These six historical thinking skills progress from kindergarten through
grade twelve to ensure students are college- and career-ready.

       History Skill                                   Description
       Comparison      Explanation of similarities and differences and the reasons for those
                       differences between groups, time periods, and geographic regions.
       Causation       Explanation of causes and effects on geography, people, conflict and
                       consensus, centered around the impact of significant events. While
                       historical sequencing is beneficial, students must be able to separate
                       causation from correlation.
     Periodization     Periodization is the process of structuring historical periods. Periods
                       are artificial historical constructs created in order to group information
                       and better understand similar phenomena. Further, the comparison and
                       connection of different periods and the process of establishing key
                       events as turning points in order to construct one’s own unique time
                       periods.
        Context        Correlation between specific circumstances and broad processes
                       immediately relevant to the deeper meaning of primary and secondary
                       sources. The influence of those circumstances and processes on
                       primary sources and vice versa will be evaluated.
 Continuity and Change Continuity refers to large-scale historical processes that remain
                       constant while change refers to specific phenomenon that remain
                       limited in time and space. The process involves the identification of
                       patterns that transcend specific time periods.
       Evidence        Utilizing historical evidence, especially, primary sources to effectively
                       support arguments.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 147
                          Grade 4:               Grade 5:               Grade 6:                Grade 8:
                      United States &         United States &             World             South Carolina        Modern World         US History & the
                      South Carolina          South Carolina           Civilizations        and the United          History              Constitution
                       History, Part I        History, Part II                                    States
                    Identify                Generate                Utilize broad         Utilize multiple      Utilize similarities   Utilize similarities
                    comparisons based       comparisons based       characteristics of    characteristics of    and differences        and differences
                    on common or            on common or            historical            historical            among historical       among multiple
    Comparison




                    differing               differing               developments to       developments to       developments over      historical
                    characteristics or      characteristics or      create a              create a              time, place, and       developments over
                    contexts.               contexts.               comparative           comparative           culture to create a    culture, time, and
                                                                    analysis.             analysis.             comparative            place to create a
                                                                                                                analysis.              comparative
                                                                                                                                       analysis.
                    Identify multiple Analyze multiple              Analyze significant Identify and             Analyze significant Evaluate
                    causes and effects, causes and multiple         turning points in compare                    turning points,       significant turning
                    to include           effects, to include        history to assess     significant turning including the            points, including
    Causation




                    distinguishing long- distinguishing long-       multiple long-term points, including         related causes and related causes and
                    term and short-term term and short-term         and short-term        the related causes effects that affect effects that affect
                    causes and effects. causes and effects.         causes and effects. and effects that         historical continuity historical continuity
                                                                                          affect historical      and change.           and change.
                                                                                          continuity and
                                                                                          change.
                    Organize a              Organize a              Organize a            Utilize significant Summarize and            Summarize,
                    historical narrative    historical narrative    historical narrative turning points to analyze the                 analyze, and assess
    Periodization




                    into time periods       into time periods       into time periods     justify the historical methods historians the methods
                    using units of time     using units of time     using units of time narrative of a time use categorize             historians use
                    (e.g., decades, half-   (e.g., decades, half-   (e.g., decades, half- period.                historical            categorize historical
                    centuries,              centuries,              centuries, centuries)                        developments to       developments to
                    centuries).             centuries).             and significant                              create historical     create historical
                                                                    turning points.                              periodization.        periodization.



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 148
                           Grade 4:               Grade 5:               Grade 6:               Grade 8:
                       United States &         United States &             World            South Carolina             Modern World         US History & the
                       South Carolina          South Carolina           Civilizations       and the United               History              Constitution
                        History, Part I        History, Part II                                  States
                     Make connections        Describe historical     Identify historical Explain how                 Analyze how           Justify how the
                     between historical      developments            context by           historical themes          historical events     relationship
                     developments in         using specific          analyzing historical are used to                produce themes that between various
                     history using           references to time,     developments using determine context            create context by historical themes
      Context




                     specific references     place, and broader      specific references when analyzing              which we              and multiple
                     to time, place, and     contexts.               to time, place, and significant events.         understand            historical
                     broader contexts.                               broader contexts.                               historical            developments
                                                                                                                     developments.         create a multi-
                                                                                                                                           faceted context
                                                                                                                                           when analyzing
                                                                                                                                           significant events.
                     Recognize patterns      Recognize patterns      Identify and            Analyze significant     Examine               Evaluate
                     of historical           of historical           explain significant     turning points and      significant turning significant turning
  Continuities and




                     continuities and        continuities and        theme-based             theme-based             points and theme- points and theme-
     Changes




                     changes in history.     changes, and            patterns of             patterns of             based patterns of     based patterns of
                                             identify turning        continuities and        continuities and        continuities and      continuities and
                                             points in history.      changes within a        changes within a        changes within a      changes within a
                                                                     period of time.         period of time.         period, including period, including
                                                                                                                     catalysts for those catalysts for those
                                                                                                                     changes.              changes.
                     Identify, source,       Identify, source,       Identify, source,       Identify, source,       Identify, interpret, Identify, source,
                     and utilize different   and utilize different   and utilize different   and utilize different   and utilize different and utilize different
                     forms of evidence,      forms of evidence,      forms of evidence,      forms of evidence,      forms of evidence, forms of evidence,
      Evidence




                     including primary       including primary       including primary       including primary       including primary including primary
                     and secondary           and secondary           and secondary           and secondary           and secondary         and secondary
                     sources, used in an     sources, used in an     sources, used in an     sources, used in an     sources, used in an sources, used in an
                     inquiry-based study     inquiry-based study     inquiry-based study     inquiry-based study     inquiry-based study inquiry-based study
                     of history.             of history.             of history.             of history.             of history.           of history


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 149
Appendix C
Geography Skills Progression

Geographic inquiry includes making observations, gathering evidence, conducting analysis, and
communicating findings. This inquiry requires using skills that include reading, writing,
modeling, and mapping. These six geographic thinking skills progress using appropriate grade-
level content, as described within the grade level indicators, to ensure students are college- and
career-ready.

                             Grade 3:                    Grade 7:
                        Contemporary World          Geography of World           Human Geography
                            Geography                    Regions
                                                                                Identify, use, interpret,
                         Identify, use, interpret, Identify, use, interpret,
                                                                                  and construct local
      Mapping             and construct large- and construct regional-
                                                                                 through global scale
                               scale maps.               scale maps.
                                                                                         maps.

                        Identify, use, interpret, Identify, use, interpret, Identify, use, interpret,
                          and construct basic and construct geographic and construct geographic
    Models and
                        geographic models and models and other visual models and other visual
   Representation
                              other visual         representations at the    representations from
                            representations.          regional-scale.       local to global scales.
                                                 Identify, use, and                Identify, use, and
                      Identify, use, and
                                             interpret different forms         interpret different forms
  Gather Evidence interpret different forms
                                              of evidence, including            of evidence, including
 and Communicate of evidence, including
                                              primary and secondary             primary and secondary
     Findings      primary and secondary
                                             sources, at the regional-          sources, from local to
                          sources.
                                                       scale.                        global scales.
                                              Identify, compare, and            Identify, compare, and
                   Identify and compare the
    Conditions,                                    evaluate the                       evaluate the
                        development of
  Connections, and                                development of               development of complex
                    conditions, connections,
     Regions                                 conditions, connections,          conditions, connections,
                          and regions.
                                                   and regions.                       and regions.
                                                                                Identify, compare, and
                             Identify spatial       Identify and compare
        Scale                                                                      interpret spatial
                               hierarchies.           spatial hierarchies.
                                                                                      hierarchies.
                                                    Identify and analyze        Identify, analyze, and
                             Identify spatial
  Distribution and                                  spatial distributions,          explain spatial
                         distributions, patterns,
      Patterns                                          patterns, and           distributions, patterns,
                            and associations.
                                                        associations.              and associations.




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 150
Appendix D
Glossary

This glossary is intended for teachers and not designed for student assessment purposes. It
provides discipline specific definitions of important yet less well-known terms that appear
throughout the standards and the indicators.

         Term                                                 Definition
absolutism                   a form of government in which all power is held by a single leader
AD                           Anno Domini is Latin for "year of our Lord," and it represents the
                             years after the estimated birth of Jesus
alliance                     a union or association formed for mutual benefit, especially between
                             countries or organizations
alphanumeric grid            a grid of numbered rows and lettered columns (or vice versa)
                             superimposed on a map, used to find and identify features
antebellum                   existing before the outbreak of war especially used in reference to
                             the American Civil War
anti-natal                   a system or policy concerned with limiting population growth
appeasement                  the policy of granting concessions to potential enemies to maintain
                             peace
archaeology                  the study of history and humankind through the excavation of sites
                             and the analysis of artifacts and stratigraphy
armistice                    an agreement made by opposing sides in a war to stop fighting for a
                             certain time; a truce
artifact                     anything made, used, or modified by humans, typically an item of
                             cultural or historical interest, but it does not need to be old
Atlantic World               the development of interactions and exchanges between Africa, the
                             Americas, and Europe beginning in the 1500s
authoritarian                a structure of government in which power is concentrated in an
government                   individual or small group and is built upon the demand of absolute
                             obedience by citizens to this authority
autocracy                    a country, state, or society governed by one person with absolute
                             power
balkanization                the process of decentralizing political power; breaking up of a region
                             into smaller independent states
bureaucracy                  administration characterized by excessive red tape and routines
BCE                          before the Common Era or time before year one of the Gregorian
                             calendar; BCE is used in these standards (instead of BC)
black codes                  the unofficial laws passed by southern governments during
                             Reconstruction in an attempt to continue to control their former
                             slaves; these laws were nullified by the fourteenth and fifteenth
                             amendments to the Constitution
blockade                     closing a port to cut off supplies from entry or exit
boundaries                   a line marking the limit or extent within which a system exists or
                             functions, including a social group, a neighborhood, a state, or
                             physical feature

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 151
         Term                                                 Definition
business cycles              repetitive periods of economic activity including growth, recession,
                             and recovery
capitalism                   an economic system characterized by private ownership and
                             investment in the means of production (i.e., capital); a system in
                             which economic decisions are based on supply and demand,
                             competition, and price in a free market
cash crop                    crops grown for profit rather than consumption
CE                           the Common Era beginning with year one of the Gregorian calendar;
                             CE is used in these standards (instead of AD)
charter                      a document granting special rights to a person or group
Christian humanism           an intellectual movement in northern Europe in the late fifteenth and
                             early sixteenth centuries that combined the interest in the classics of
                             the Italian Renaissance with an interest in the sources of early
                             Christianity, including the New Testament and the writings of the
                             church fathers
civic humanism               a modern term for the moral, social and political philosophy that in
                             the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries began to be
                             articulated in Italian city-states and most notably in Florence
civil rights                 the rights of citizens to political and social freedom and equality
checks and balances          an application of limited government in which each branch and/or
                             level of government has the ability to “check” (i.e., restrict) the
                             functions and exercise of power by other branches/levels of
                             government
Cold War                     the period from the end of World War II to the fall of the Berlin Wall
                             (1945–89) during which the political, economic, social, and military
                             objectives of the United States and its democratic allies directly
                             rivaled those of the Soviet Union and its communist satellites
colonialism                  the policy or practice of acquiring full or partial political control over
                             another country, occupying it with settlers, and exploiting it
                             economically
Columbian Exchange           the name coined by the environmental historian Alfred W. Crosby to
                             describe the widespread exchange of plants, animals, human
                             populations, diseases, and technology that began in 1492 with the
                             first voyage of Christopher Columbus and spread throughout Europe,
                             Asia, Africa, and the Americas
command economy              system where the government, rather than the free market,
                             determines what goods should be produced, how much should be
                             produced and the price at which the goods are offered for sale
communism                    a political system in which all property and wealth is, in theory,
                             owned by all the citizens in a classless society that is controlled by
                             their government
concurrent powers            the application of federalism in which a function or authority is
                             possessed by both the national and state governments at the same
                             time
confederal                   referring to an alliance of independent states manifesting a degree of

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 152
          Term                                                Definition
                             national unity through a central government of united powers (e.g.,
                             Articles of Confederation, Confederate States of America)
condition                    a geographic term referring to a characteristic or feature in a given
                             location
conservative                 tending or disposed to maintaining traditional or existing views,
                             conditions, or institutions (i.e. the specific policies supported by
                             conservatives have changed over the course of history)
constitutionalism            adherence to the system of a constitutional government
constitutions                the plans—written or unwritten—of individual governments that
                             outline the structures and functions of those particular bodies and
                             serve as a social contract between them and the people under their
                             authority
consumerism                  a preoccupation with and an inclination toward the buying of
                             consumer goods
containment                  the policy of restricting the expansion of communism during the post-
                             World War II period
cost/benefit analysis        a systematic approach to estimating the strengths and weaknesses of
                             alternatives (i.e. as in transactions, activities, functional business
                             requirements or projects investments)
the Crusades                 a series of wars fought between the Muslims and Christians over
                             control of the Holy Land in the eleventh through the thirteenth
                             centuries.
culture                      learned behavior of people, which includes their belief systems and
                             languages, their social relationships, their institutions and
                             organizations, and their material goods (e.g., food, clothing,
                             buildings, tools, machines)
decolonization               the act of getting rid of colonization, or freeing a country from being
                             dependent on another country
demand                       the desire and ability of individuals to purchase economic goods or
                             services at the market price; along with supply, one of the two key
                             determinants of price
democracy                    a form of government in which political authority rests with the
                             people and is exercised by all the people, either directly or indirectly
                             through their elected representatives
demographic patterns         changes shown in population size, composition, rates of growth,
                             density, fertility, mortality rate, and/or migration
depression                   a prolonged and severe decline in the level of economic activity in a
                             state or nation
diffusion                    the spread of people, ideas, technology, and products among places
diplomacy                    art and practice of conducting negotiations between representatives
                             of states; usually refers to the conduct of international relations on a
                             full range of issues
discrimination               the practice of denying people rights or treating people unfairly on
                             the basis of categorical or prejudicial thinking

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 153
         Term                                               Definition
disenfranchise               deprive a person or group the right to vote or to be politically
                             involved
disposable income            income remaining after deduction of taxes and other mandatory
                             charges, available to be spent or saved as one chooses
dissent                      beliefs and/or actions that are contrary to the accepted or official
                             policy
Dixiecrat                    any of the Southern Democrats who seceded from the party in 1948
                             in opposition to its policy of extending civil rights
domestication                the process of taming an animal and keeping it as a pet or on a farm
e-commerce                   commercial transactions conducted electronically on the Internet
economic disparity           a discernable difference in the economic well-being of defined
                             segments of the population
economic mobility            the ability of movement between income classes by an individual or
                             across generations
emancipation                 to set someone free from slavery; to be set free from legal
                             restrictions
embargo                      an official ban on trade or other commercial activity with a particular
                             country
the Enlightenment            also known as the Age of Reason; the eighteenth-century movement
                             in which philosophers used reason and scientific methodology to
                             explain how the universe worked
entrepreneurs/               individuals who assume the risk in producing a product for a profit—
entrepreneurial/             their role and enterprise
entrepreneurship
enumerated powers            authoritative capacities delegated to the federal government by the
                             U.S. Constitution
ethnic/ethnicity             a classification of large groups of people according to common
                             racial, national, tribal, religious, linguistic, or cultural origin or
                             background
famine                       an extreme scarcity of food
federal                      denoting the central government of the United States
federalism                   the principles of the Federalists Party
fiscal policy                a government policy that attempts to manage the economy by
                             controlling taxing and spending
free enterprise              an economic system in which private businesses compete for profit
                             without government involvement beyond those regulations necessary
                             to protect public interest and to keep the nation’s economy in
                             balance
genocide                     the deliberate and systematic extermination of a national, racial,
                             political, or cultural group
geospatial technologies      computer hardware and software with which users analyze and
                             represent geographic data at infinitely varied levels; includes
                             technologies related to mapping and interpreting physical and human
                             features on Earth’s surface (i.e., global positioning systems (GPS),
                             geographic information systems (GIS), remote sensing (RS), and

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 154
          Term                                              Definition
                             geospatial visualization)
gerrymandering               to divide into election districts to give one political party an electoral
                             majority in a large number of districts while concentrating the voting
                             strength of the opposition in as few districts as possible
globalization                the process of the increasing interconnectedness of the world through
                             trade, migration, technology, and cultural diffusion
headright system             system which allowed people to get land of 50 to 150 acres for each
                             settler he brought to the colony (e.g., family, indentured servant,
                             and/or enslaved person)
Holocaust                    the state-sponsored persecution and systematic extermination of
                             European Jews and other minority groups by Nazi Germany and its
                             allies
holy war                     a war declared or waged in support of a religious cause
humanism                     the way of thinking and learning that stresses the importance of
                             individual human worth, ability, and dignity
immigration                  the action of coming to live permanently in a foreign country
imperialism                  the policy and process of creating an empire through the acquisition
                             of colonies and/or the establishment of economic spheres of interest
indentured servant           individuals who agreed to work for someone for a set period of time
                             to pay off their debt of passage to the American colonies
infrastructure               the basic physical and organizational structures and facilities (e.g.,
                             buildings, roads, and power supplies) needed for a society or
                             enterprise
isolationism                 the policy of staying out of the business of other nations by
                             abstention from alliances and other international political relations
investment                   an asset or item that is purchased with the hope that it will generate
                             income or will appreciate in the future
Jim Crow laws                laws passed in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries designed to
                             separate whites and blacks in the United States
labor unions                 an organization of workers formed for the purpose of advancing its
                             members' interests in respect to wages, benefits, and working
                             conditions
liberal                      tending or disposed to espousing unconventional, nontraditional
                             views, conditions, or institutions; open to change
limited government           a political principle or structure in which minimal authority and
                             power is granted to the government and is restricted to only that
                             which is necessary for the government to perform its function
market economy               an economic system in which prices are determined by the free
                             exchange of goods and services with minimum government
                             interference
mass politics                a political order resting on the emergence of mass political parties;
                             the emergence of mass politics is generally associated with the rise
                             of mass society coinciding with the Industrial Revolution in the west
material culture             the physical arts and artifacts of a body of people
matrilineal                  the family ties based upon the mother's side of the family; common

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 155
          Term                                              Definition
                             among the Eastern Woodland Indians of the Southeast
mental maps                  the mental images that a person has of particular areas, including his
                             or her knowledge of features and spatial relationships
marginalized people          individuals kept in a powerless position within a society
martyrdom                    a person who willingly gives his or her life for a cause in which she
                             or he believes
migration                    the movement by people from one place to another with the
                             intentions of settling
mercantilism                 an economic policy under which nations seek to increase their wealth
                             and power by obtaining large amounts of gold and silver and by
                             selling more goods than they buy
Middle Passage               stage of triangular trade in which millions of Africans were shipped
                             to the New World as part of the Atlantic slave trade
militarism                   the belief or desire of a government or people that a country should
                             maintain a strong military capability and be prepared to use it
                             aggressively to defend or promote national interests
militia                      non-regular army of private citizens
monarchy                     a form of government in which political power is exercised by a
                             single person, usually under the claim of divine or hereditary right
monetary policy              the macroeconomic policy laid down by the central bank, currency
                             board or other regulatory committee; it involves management of
                             money supply and interest rate and is the demand side economic
                             policy used by the government of a country to achieve
                             macroeconomic objectives like inflation, consumption, growth and
                             liquidity
nationalism                  a belief system in which the interests of a particular nation are of
                             utmost importance
nation-states                political units that claim sovereignty over defined territories
                             inhabited by groups of people who share traditions, beliefs, and
                             language
natural rights               any right that exists by virtue of natural law
naval stores                 products made from pine trees to be used in the building of ships and
                             other wood goods (e.g., tar, rosin, pitch, turpentine)
neutrality                   the state of not supporting or helping either side in a conflict,
                             disagreement, etc.; impartiality
partisan warfare             arises when an irregular military force forms to oppose control of an
                             area by an army of occupation by some kind of insurgent activity
opportunity cost             the value of any alternative that one must give up when he or she
                             makes a choice
partition                    the action or state of dividing or being divided into parts
periphery countries          countries that are less developed than the semi-periphery and core
                             countries; these countries usually receive a disproportionately small
                             share of global wealth
petroglyph                   a rock carving, especially a prehistoric one


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 156
          Term                                               Definition
physical features            a geographic term referring to physical attributes of a natural or
                             artificial area
political machine            an organization whose main goal is related to the money, influence
                             or prestige of getting and keeping political power
popular sovereignty          the political concept that government is created and given authority
                             through the consent of the people and that the people thereby retain
                             the right to “alter or abolish” their government
population density           the number of people occupying a specific unit of land measurement
population distribution      the makeup of the human population in a particular area in terms of
                             variables such as age, race, or sex
primary economic             the production of naturally existing or culturally improved resources
activity (sector)            (e.g., agriculture, ranching, forestry, fishing, extraction of minerals
                             or ores)
Progressivism                support for or advocacy of social reform
pro-natal                    a policy stance concerned with supporting population growth
propaganda                   information, especially of a biased or misleading nature, used to
                             promote or publicize a particular political cause or point of view
proprietor                   an owner or manager of a business
racism                       actions or policies that create systemic disadvantages against
                             someone of a different race based on the belief that one's own race is
                             superior
recession                    a period of two consecutive yearly quarters with negative economic
                             growth
refugee                      a person who has been forced to leave his or her country in order to
                             escape war, persecution, or natural disaster
republican/                  a form of government that functions through the use of
republicanism                representatives elected by the citizens; republican government is
                             often referred to as “representative” government
reserved powers              an application of federalism in which any function or authority that
                             is not delegated to the federal government or not prohibited to state
                             governments is reserved to the states or the people
revolution                   a forcible overthrow or change of ideas, a government or social order
                             in favor of a new system
right to work                relating to or promoting a worker's right not to be required to join a
                             labor union
rule of law                  the principle that every member of a society, even a ruler, must
                             follow the law
scale                        the size of places or regions being studied
scarcity                     the gap between limited resources and potentially limitless wants
Scramble for Africa          the occupation, division, and colonization of African territory by
                             European powers during the period of New Imperialism, between
                             1881 and 1914; is also called the Partition of Africa and by some, the
                             Conquest of Africa
secondary economic           the conversion of raw materials from the primary economic sector


South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 157
          Term                                                Definition
activity (sector)            into finished industrial products (e.g., manufactured goods, oil
                             refining, construction, ship building)
sectionalism                 the placing of the interests of one’s own region ahead of those of the
                             nation’s as a whole
sedition                     conduct or speech inciting people to rebel against the authority of a
                             state or monarch
semi-periphery               the industrializing, mostly capitalist countries, which are positioned
countries                    between the periphery and core countries
separation of powers         a principle of American government that requires constitutional
                             authority to be shared by the legislative, judicial, and executive
                             branches of government
slavery                      refers to a condition in which individuals are owned by others, who
                             control every aspect of their lives
spatial hierarchy            a geographical clustering of regions, where important differences
                             exist in terms of innovation and development
social Darwinism             the theory that individuals, groups, and peoples are subject to the
                             same Darwinian laws of natural selection as plants and animals; now
                             largely discredited, it was advocated in late 19th century to justify
                             political conservatism, imperialism, and racism
socialism                    an economic and political system in which the government owns or
                             regulates the production and distribution of goods
spatial                      pertains to space on Earth’s surface
spatial distribution         the spread and placement of physical and human phenomena on
                             Earth’s surface
suburbanization              a population shift from central urban areas into suburbs, resulting in
                             formation of (sub)urban sprawl; sub-urbanization is inversely related
                             to urbanization, which denotes population shift from rural areas into
                             urban centers
suffrage                     the right to vote in political elections
supranational                corporations and international agencies that have power or influence
organizations                transcending national boundaries or governments
(supranationalism)
supply                       the quantities of a good or service that a firm is willing and able to
                             make available for sale at varying prices (used in concept of supply
                             and demand)
sustainability               the integration of physical systems with human patterns of activity to
                             assure continuity
tariff                       a tax on imports or exports
temperance                   moderation in or abstinence from the use of alcoholic beverages
tertiary sector              the provision of services to the general population (e.g., banking,
                             retailing, education)
terrorism                    violent acts, executed in support of ideological, political, or religious
                             goals, against persons or property to intimidate a government or its
                             population
total war                    a military conflict in which the contenders are willing to make any

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 158
          Term                                               Definition
                             sacrifice in lives and other resources to obtain a complete victory, as
                             distinguished from limited war
totalitarian                 the twentieth century governmental structure or principle in which
                             the state exercises centralized, absolute control of all aspects of life
                             for individual citizens
unitary system               a government in which all authority is vested in a central authority
                             from which regional and local governments derive their powers
unlimited government         the political principle or structure that allows a government to
                             expand its authority and power as it deems necessary in order to
                             accomplish its own goals and objectives
urbanization                 the process where an increasing percentage of a population lives in
                             cities and suburbs and is often linked to industrialization and
                             modernization




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 159
Appendix E

                             Acknowledgements
The development of this document was facilitated by the Division of College and Career
Readiness through the Office of Standards and Learning under the direction of Julie G. Fowler,
Ph.D., Deputy Superintendent, Division of College and Career Readiness; David Mathis, Ph.D.,
Deputy Superintendent, Division of College and Career Readiness; Anne M. Pressley, Ph.D.,
Director, Office of Standards and Learning; and Dawn Hawkins, Ed.D., Team Leader, Office of
Standards and Learning.
The following South Carolina Department of Education (SCDE) staff members assisted in the
design and development of this document:


Stephen P. Corsini
K–12 Social Studies
Office of Standards and Learning

Jeffrey C. Eargle, Ph.D.
K–12 Social Studies
Office of Standards and Learning

Elizabeth P. King
K–12 Social Studies
Office of Standards and Learning

Christopher M. Turpin, Ed.D.
K–12 Social Studies
Office of Standards and Learning

Leslie W. Skinner, Ph.D.
Social Studies Assessment
Office of Assessment




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 160
South Carolina owes a debt of gratitude to the following individuals and groups for their
assistance in the development of new, high-quality, South Carolina Social Studies College- and
Career-Ready Standards. The Education Oversight Committee’s review panel that included
educators, parents, business and community members, and higher education faculty, and a task
force appointed by the SCDE that included educators, parents, business and community
members, and higher education faculty reviewed previous standards and provided guidance for
the revision.

South Carolina Social Studies College-and Career-Ready Standards were collaboratively written
by a team of South Carolina classroom teachers, instructional coaches, administrators, district
leaders, higher education faculty, and representatives from professional social studies
organizations.


Nancy Aguirre, Ph.D.
The Citadel

Brea Amick
SC Council for the Social Studies

Bea Bailey, Ed.D.
Clemson University

Susan Barnes
Richland School District One

Brock Beaver
SC Social Studies Supervisors Association

Audrey Browne
Lee County School District

Connie Blyther
Benedict College
SC Council for African American Studies

Perri Bryant
Lexington School District Three

Mary Catherine Carroll
VirtualSC

Larianne Collins, Ph.D.
University of South Carolina

Daniella Cook, Ph.D.
University of South Carolina

South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 161
Cindy Cordell
Saluda County School District

Stephen Corsini
Newberry County School District

Rikki Davenport
Charleston County School District

D. Brian Day
Calhoun County School District

Theresa Denholm
Berkeley County School District

Cathy Epps
Kershaw County School District

Tami Finley
Greenville County School District

Amy Flynn
Spartanburg School District Two

Latosha Fulmore
Calhoun County School District

Laura Jane Gantt
Lexington Richland School District Five

Michael Glover, Jr.
Fairfield County School District

Kristina Greenaway
Dorchester School District Two

Phillip Hare
Richland School District One

Tonya Janicke
Rock Hill School District Three

Tammie Jenkins
Orangeburg School District Five




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 162
Rachel Johnson
Spartanburg School District Six

Dawn Lisk
Fort Mill School District Four

Maria Lott
Berkeley County School District

Zachariah Lowe
Sumter School District

Jerry Mitchell, Ph.D.
South Carolina Geographic Alliance

Tim Monreal
Lexington School District One

Leslie Carter Parks
Horry County School District

Jacqueline Persinski, Ed.D.
Rock Hill School District Three

Angela Peterson
Beaufort County School District

Michele Phillips, Ed.D.
Public Charter School Alliance of SC

J. Matt Rose
Lexington Richland School District Five

Amanda Sevon-Lynch
Lexington School District One

Tracee Simpson
Pickens County School District

Amanda Stiglbauer
Richland School District Two
SC Economics

Necie Tanner
VirtualSC



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 163
Christopher M. Turpin, Ed.D.
Charleston County School District

Crystal Whitaker
Fairfield County School District

Jody Yates
VirtualSC

The South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards were reviewed by the
public. All feedback given by these individuals and groups was considered during the revision
phase of the development process. Revisions were collaboratively written by original writers and
an additional team of South Carolina classroom teachers, instructional coaches, district leaders,
higher education faculty, and professionals who specialize in social studies.

Christine Beresniova, Ph.D.
South Carolina Council for the Holocaust

Jeanie Dailey
Horry County School District

Julia Dawson
Richland County School District One

Jeffrey C. Eargle, Ph.D.
University of South Carolina

Ramona Grunden
TRC Companies, Inc.

Christopher Judge
Native American Studies Center

Valinda W. Littlefield, Ph.D.
University of South Carolina

Albert Robertson
Lexington School District One

Katrina W. Rouse
Florence School District One

Robert Scarlett
Berkeley County School District
US Air Force, Retired



South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 164
Dana Thomas
Newberry County School District

Marc Turner
Richland School District Two




South Carolina Social Studies College- and Career-Ready Standards
Page 165
